Disclaimer: This file is generated using OCR (optical character recognition) and/or HTR (handwritten text recognition), which are technologies that convert images of text into text. While the technologies are good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Ellen and Julia. A novel in two volumes. By Mrs. Parsons. ...
ELLEN and JULIA.
A NOVEL,,IN TWO VOLUMES.,BY MRS. PERSONS,,AUTHOR OF ERRORS OF EDUCATION, WOMAN AS SHE SHOULD BE, INTRIGUES OF A MORNING, AND,CASTLE OF WOLFENBACH.,VOL. I.,LONDON:,PRINTED FOR WILLIAM LANE, AT THE Winerva-Vrets, LE ADENH ALL-STREET Z,AND SOLD BY,E. HARLOW, Bookseller to HER MAJESTY, Pall-Mall,,M.DCC .XCIII,
T O,Mrs. C R E S P I G NF,,GROVE-HOUSE, CAMBERWELL.,MADAM,,THAT I presume to shelter under your Patronage the following Sheets,will not, I hope, be deemed too great an intrusion on that goodness and favor I have. ip constantly experienced, and to which I have
have been so essentially indebted for the advantages derived from my former tri- fling productions; You, Madam, first condescended to honor them with your approbation, and impelled by motives which evinced the superior goodness of '«»'your heart, you first encouraged me to commit them to the Public ; humanity threw a veil over the imperfections your judgment could not approve, and your influence, like the exhilerating fun, dif¬ fused candour and lenity into every breast, whose favorable opinion could do me honor. Impressed as I am with a sense of such unexampled kindness, perhaps I do wrong to tax it_fo highly as to solicit the honor of your patronage for ‘ Ellen and Julia,’ but conscious,of
of the very small degree of merit to which the Work in itself can lay any claim; pardon me. Madam, is I presume to seek, under the sanction of a name ib respectable, to give it that degree of con¬ sequence in the eyes of the world, to which otherwise it could have no pre¬ tensions, and at the same time indulge the gratification of that vanity you have raised and cherished by your distinguished favors, in seizing this public opportunity of avowing myself, with the warmest sentiments of respect and gratitude,,MADAM,,Your much obliged,,and devoted humble Servant,,Eliza Parsons.,London,,November 12, 1793.
PREFACE.,THE following Work I submit to the Judgment of the Public with much greater diffidence and anxiety than when I first threw myself on its candour and indulgence ; because the many late ex¬ cellent productions of other female wri¬ ters painfully convince me of my own inability and deficiencies, and at the fame time lays me open to the imputation of presumption and undue vanity ; But as the foil sometimes serves to give additi¬ onal brilliancy to the Diamond, I may at least be pardoned for an attempt to 5 follow.
follow, though I cannot overtake, those celebrated Ladies to whom the Public are so much obliged for their amuse¬ ment. To the {hafts of criticism I bow with respect, neither deprecating their severity nor imploring their indulgence, since either would equally offend their impartiality and judgment.
CHAP. I.,Tp A R removed from the " busy haunts of men,” in a retired but most delight¬ ful situation, Mr. Woodville lived, secluded from the world in the bosom of his family, an amiable wife and two lovely daughters; nearly sixteen years had elapsed since he had quitted a life of fashion, dissipation, court intrigue, and those, who, in the bright day of vol. I. B his
his prosperity had called themselves his friends. Unexpected disappointments and disgusts, working on a temper naturally irritable, proud, and impetuous, caused a sudden revo¬ lution in his mind and manners; he hastily fled from London to France, and from thence returned again to a remote and almost unfre¬ quented part of this kingdom, where solitude and inactivity nursed his discontents, and inspired him with an aversion to society.,Mr. Woodville was descended from a no¬ ble family, he was an only son, consequently no expence was spared in his education, to make him worthy of the respectable name he bore, and the very handsome fortune to which he was heir, independent of his ex¬ pectations from an aunt of his mother’s, a single lady of large property.,WKen his education was compleated, under the care of his tutor, he was sent abroad to visit the different courts of Europe-he had a strong understanding and a lively ima¬ gination. •,-UMHM The
The gentleman who accompanied him on his tour was of a truly respectable character as to morals, but his knowledge of the world, was extremely confined; the attention which his studies at the university required, and the narrow limits of his fortune, precluded him from sharing in the amusements, or joining- in the dissipations of his fellow collegians, con¬ sequently he studied books more than men, and indulged particular sentiments and pre¬ judices that rendered him a very unfit com¬ panion to guide a young man who had adopted similar ideas, through different countries, with whose customs, manners, and soci¬ eties he was entirely unacquainted, but by books. The elder Mr. Woodville, never¬ theless, though sensible of those deficiencies, thought them greatly overbalanced by his strict integrity and goodness of heart, he there¬ fore allowed his son a very liberal income, and provided handsomely for Mr. Moyle to accompany him.,. ’Tis not necessary to follow them in their tour, suffice it to say, that with strong pre-,B 2 judices
4 ELLEN AND JULIA-,judices in favor of their own country, and a sovereign contempt for foreigners of every description, instead of profiting by the let¬ ters of recommendation they carried . with them, when once those letters were delivered and the usual compliments reciprocally paid, they sought out their own countrymen, and attached themselves to a society from which they could acquire neither improvements in the language, nor knowledge in the manners of different nations.,Mr. Moyle did not at first foresee the per¬ nicious consequences attending this thought¬ less plan, he held the French people in the most ridiculous point of view; he considered them as light, frivolous, and incapable of friendship, prone to every vice and folly which disgraces human nature, and from, the narrow prejudice of education and his confined studies did not avail himself of the opportunities that occured of acquiring more liberal sen¬ timents. His pupil had formed his judg¬ ment on the fame scale, and, not fond of giving
giving himself trouble, took people exactly as he found them, without studying charac¬ ters, and unhappily they found too many of their countrymen to keep them in counte¬ nance.,The very few who travel for improvement bear so small a proportion to the idle and dissipated, that Mr. Woodville and his friend very soon found themselves entangled with a set of acquaintance which did them no honor in the opinion of those whose favorable judg¬ ments were really worth their cultivation.,Several disagreeable adventures in different places at length gave Mr. Moyle serious concern for the morals and health of his young friend, and at Florence he fell in with an old acquaintance, who had the honor of accom¬ panying the Marquis of B—-; this gentle¬ man opened his eyes to the impropriety of their connexions, and persuaded him to adopt a different plan—to associate with such cha¬ racters as might improve both his heart and understanding, and pay attention to the,B j manners
6 ELLEN AND JULIA.,manners and customs of the different cities he visited 5 but, alas ! folly and dissipation had laid such strong hold of Mr. Woodville’s mind, that the remonstrances of his friend were treated with the highest contempt: he pursued, what he called pleasure, with such avidity, became the companion of several ri¬ otous young men of fashion, who initiated him into every vice, and devoted himself so entirely to gambling and intrigue, that his expences very far exceeded the allowance his father had liberally made him, and confer quently he was plunged into a thousand dif¬ ficulties which reduced him to mean unwor¬ thy shifts to supply the demands on his purse.,Poor Mr. Moyle saw, with infinite con¬ cern, the folly of the conduct they had pur¬ sued, and had no other resource than to write the elder Mr. Woodville the exact state of their situation—this letter produced an im¬ mediate order for their return, and to avoi4 any reflections from his son on Mr. Moyle, he gave no other reason for his request, than the
the indifferent state of his own health. In truth, he had been subject, for some time, to repeated attacks of the gout in his head and .stomach, though that consideration alone would not have occasioned the recall of his son; but for the letter he received from Mr. Moyle. Young Woodville was exceedingly displeased at the necessity for obeying his fa¬ ther's orders, and quitted his companions with •infinite reluctance, but was somewhat con¬ soled by the hopes of seeing two or three of them within a few months in England : their departure was not delayed, and in a very short time they arrived in England; on that very day Mr. Woodville the elder expired sud¬ denly, and when Mr. Moyle and his young friend alighted at the house, they found the whole family immersed in the deepest sorrow. Struck with an event so little expected, Mr. Woodville felt the sincerest grief, he flew to his mother and mingled his tears with her’s: The only consolation she could hope for was the presence of her son, yet his striking re- semblance to his late father caused an-invo-,B 4 luntary
luntary shriek, whilst she embraced him in an emphatic silence.,Several days elapsed before they were re¬ stored to that mild resignation they owed to the decrees of heaven, and a much longer time pasted ere Mr. Woodville could be pre¬ vailed upon to examine into his affairs, when he did so, he found a clear estate of eight thousand a year belonged to him, with no other incumbrance than a jointure of 1200I. per Annum to his mother ; there was also a large property in the funds of many thousand pounds, and an immense quantity of plate.,It was not possible to suppose a young man of two and twenty could be indifferent to the enjoyment of such a noble independence; in truth, he was highly gratified and soon formed his resolutions. He requested his mother still to continue in the mansion-house and live in her accustomed style; he presented Mr. Moyle with two thousand -pounds to pur¬ chase a living, over and above one thousand bequeathed to him by his father; and having with
with the assistance of his steward settled the necessary business among his tenants, he ha¬ stened to London, with all the impatience of a young man, eager to enjoy his fortune and independence.,He soon launched into every fashionable folly, and by some of his noble companions was introduced to the most noted houses for dissipation and gambling about town, where his fortune procured him a welcome recep¬ tion, and was quickly dispersed into various hands.,CHAP. IL,T TE had been nearly two years in town in ■"* the full career of pleasure, when acci¬ dent threw him into the company of two,B 5 ladies
ladies one evening, at the play, who being at¬ tended by only one gentleman, and the crowd occasioning great difficulty in getting to their carriage, Mr. Woodville, who had been much struck with the charms of the youngest lady, and had siowly followed them, observing their embarrassment, eagerly offered his assistance, 9nd was permitted to escort the elder one, and see them in safety to their coach; he re¬ ceived their thanks for his politeness, but had no opportunity to enquire their names.,All night his thoughts were occupied by the engaging object he had seen at the theatre, he was sure she muff be a stranger, as he had never observed her at any public place until that evening, and for the first time in his life he felt particular anxiety and restlessness to fee her again.,The following day strolling into the park, on returning down the mall, he met the very gentleman who had accompanied the ladies the preceding evening, and who now stopped and very politely thanked him for his affist-,4 ance
a nee to his wife and her niece. Mr. Wood¬ ville gladly embraced the opportunity of cul¬ tivating his acquaintance, and returned with him towards Buckingham House. In the course of their walk meeting several of his companions who saluted him by his name, the gentleman asked him if he was related to the Woodville’s of Dorsetshire ; on his answering in the affirmative, and frankly telling his name and place of residence, the other expressed great pleasure in their accidental meeting, having formerly well known his mother and her family : This brought on a general con¬ versation, which ended in a warm invitation from Mr. Sandford, (the stranger’s name) to take his mutton with him, at five o’clock, in Dover- Street ; a request which Mr. Wood¬ ville gladly acceded to, and they parted mu¬ tually pleased with each other. Chance had pow done for him every thing he could have desired, and he hastened with much pleasure tq his appointment, where he was introduced to Mrs. Sandford and Mils Neville.,B 6,This
iz ELLEN AND JULIA.,This young lady had loft both her parents in her infancy : Her father, a dignified cler¬ gyman, had a genteel fortune and a handsome income, but possessing that true philanthropy and benevolence of heart which ought to be the characteristic of his profession, his income was mostly appropriated to the relief of his indigent neighbours, his parishioners he con¬ sidered as his children, and intitled in his opi¬ nion to a share of every good he possessed; yet • his a6ts of benevolence were guided by a pro¬ per discrimination 5 for, as he justly observed, a trifling sum if seasonably applied would assist the industrious and careful man, whilst hun¬ dreds bestowed on the idle and profligate could be of no real utility without economy. He gave therefore with a liberal but a re¬ straining hand, and, satisfied that his expendi¬ ture did not exceed the income of his fortune, he sought not to increase it. Unhappily for '" ' ,*fs#'' his family and numerous dependants, in pursuing his uniform custom of visiting the sick, he caught a putrid fever, the distemper proved fatal, and in a few days deprived the world of a truly good man, the poor of a ge¬ nerous
nerous benefactor, and his family of an affec¬ tionate husband and father.,Mrs. Neville bore the heavy stroke like a Christian, she neither murmured or complain¬ ed, she strove to subdue her feelings, that she might do her duty towards her little girl, then five years old,and the only remaining child out of four; but, alas! sorrow seized on her heart, when the object of her tenderesi affections was entombed in the silent grave, when she was obliged to quit the house she delighted in, and the neighbourhood flic loved ; when the poor came in crowds around her, bewail¬ ing their irreparable loss, and imploring a thousand blessings on her and her child, with uplifted bands and streaming eyes; poor Mrs. Neville found her fortitude subdued ; a con¬ stitution naturally delicate sunk under her af¬ flictions, she fell into a rapid decline, and in less than ten months after the death of her beloved .husband followed him to the grave, leaving her little orphan, with about eight thousand pounds, to the care of Mrs. Sand-,ford.
. This young lady had lost both her parents in her infancy : Her father, a dignified cler¬ gyman, had a genteel fortune and a handsome income, but possessing that true philanthropy and benevolence of heart which ought to be the characteristic of his profession, his income was mostly appropriated to the relief of his indigent neighbours, his parishioners he con¬ sidered as his children, and intitled in his opi¬ nion to a share of every good he possessed; yet his acts of benevolence were guided by a pro¬ per discrimination ; for, as he justly observed, a trifling sum if seasonably applied would assist the industrious and careful man, whilst hun¬ dreds bestowed on the idle and profligate could be of no real utility without economy. He gave therefore with a liberal but a re¬ straining hand, and, satisfied that his expendi¬ ture did not exceed the income of his fortune, he sought not to increase it. Unhappily for his family and numerous dependants, in pursuing his uniform custom of visiting the sick, he caught a putrid fever, the distemper proved fatal, and in a few days deprived the world of a truly good man, the poor of a ge¬ nerous
nerous benefactor, and his family of an affec¬ tionate husband and father.,Mrs. Neville bore the heavy stroke like a Christian, she neither murmured or complain¬ ed, she strove to subdue her feelings, that she might do her duty towards her little girl, then five years old,and the only remaining child out of four; but, alas 1 sorrow seized on her heart, when the object of her tendereft affections was entombed in the silent grave, when she was obliged to quit the house fire delighted in, and the neighbourhood she loved ; when the poor came in crowds around her, bewail¬ ing their irreparable loss, and imploring a thousand blessings on her and her child, with uplifted bands and streaming eyes; poor Mrs. Neville found her fortitude subdued ; a con¬ stitution naturally delicate sunk under her af¬ flictions, she fell into a rapid decline, and in less than ten months after the death of her beloved husband followed him to the grave, leaving her little orphan, with about eight thousand pounds, to the care of Mrs. Sand- * '°"' ford,
14,ELLEN AND JULIA.,ford, her only sister and relation, no near ones of Mr. Neville’s being living.,Mr. and Mrs. Sandford had only one son, three years older than Ellen Neville, his little cousin. He was placed abroad to school, and after he left it, at his own request, entered into the army, though greatly against the wishes of his parents, who would have found it much more difficult to part with him, but for the consolation they enjoyed in the com¬ pany of their niece.,Miss Neville had received every advantage a liberal education could bestow, although her uncle chiefly resided in the country; yet the best masters, and a polite sensible woman, who superintended her education, left no room for regret that she lived so far from the capi¬ tal. She was just come of age, and to settle her affairs, and deliver up their trusts of her fortune, brought Mr. and Mrs. Sandford to town, a few days previous to Mr. Woodville’s feeing them at the play : he. found his admi¬ ration of the young lady considerably in¬ creased
creased by this second interview, nor did he fail in obtaining the good opinion of those whose esteem he was desirous- of possessing. The family intending to remain t bout a month in town, he received a general in vitation, and availed himself of the opportunity to. offer his services as their escort to pub sic places: In short, his-former companions were deserted and his whole time given up to Miss Seville, whose partiality in his favour became so vi¬ sible, that Mrs. Sandford began to be all rmed for the peace of her niece; she knew noV but Mr. Woodville might be one of those n\ ale flirts, who from idleness and vanity often fetVk to obtain the affections of a young womarV, without any other view than to gratify theirs own self consequence 5 she therefore consulted her husband on the propriety of their return to the country, or giving up a dangerous ac¬ quaintance.,That very day Mr. Woodville determin¬ ed to open his heart to Miss Neville, and make her an offer of his hand. He came to the house while Mr. and Mrs. Sandford were considering
considering in w/hat manner to decline his vi¬ sits, and finding/ the young lady alone, eagerly seized the opportunity, and disclosed his pas¬ sion. She -.pas greatly surprised, though to say the truth, not displeased, yet sire thought the Jeclam*.ion rather premature, on a fort¬ night’s ac juaintance only, and felt an indeli¬ cacy in g iving it the leasi degree of counte¬ nance.,-A.fr/_er sire had recovered from the confusion siie£CcGgeCcGg6e piaturally fell into, she thanked him for the/ honor of his good opinion, but assured him sh/s must forfeit all pretensions to it, if she c/ ould think seriously on such an osier, which /only a long intimacy could authorise, and such a knowledge of each other’s disposition as could not be obtained in a few weeks.,Mr. and Mrs. Sandford now entered the. room, and saw a visible confusion and emotion in their countenances. Agreeable to a con¬ certed plan, they announced their intention of leaving town in a few days, if their niece had no objection. She blushed, faltered, and siammered
stammered out, " she was ready to attend them.”,Woodville, much alarmed, requested a few words in private with Mr. Sandford, which being complied with, he very frankly repeated his address to Miss Neville, and solicited his interest with his charming niece : He entered into the particulars of his fortune, and though he took shame to himself for the large sums he had dissipated, yet he had still upwards of seven thousand a year, unincumbered, and offered the most liberal settlements. Mr. Sandford could not but acknowledge his for¬ tune was far above what his niece had a right to expect, and well knowing the respectability of the family, she certainly was honored in the offer:—he therefore promised to consult his Lady, and assured him of his intereft. Wood¬ ville was delighted with his success, and re¬ turned to the drawing-room, with a counte¬ nance brightened by hope and expectation.,Not to dwell on a subject so tedious as courtship, which affords but little pleasure except
except to the parties concerned, ’tis sufficient to fay the gentleman succeeded in his addresses and was united to Miss Neville, with the joint approbation of all their friends, within four months after his first application for her favor. They retired for some time to Woodville Hall, where, at their joint request, his mother con¬ tinued to reside, the two ladies were delighted with each other, and lived in the utmost har¬ mony.,CHAP. III.,Mr. Woodville soon grew tired of the country 3 during the warmth of his affection for Miss Neville, his gay compa¬ nions and dissipated pursuits were given up, •and in her company every pleasure was cen¬ tered ; but now that expectation and passion had
had subsided into a calm possession of his willies, the activity of his mind fought more entertainment than rational conversation or the amusements of the country. The Bath season being begun he proposed going there, his Lady made no objections, she was young, handsome, and had seen but little of the great world; the Kyle in which she now lived was so splendid, so unlike the moderate and re¬ tired way in which she had been accustomed to move, that no wonder a young woman should be pleased at being introduced into life in a manner so gratifying to female minds; she very earnestly besought their mother to ac¬ company them, but that good Lady, who had. been drawn to London only to attend her son’s marriage, returned with double pleasure to the family mansion, fixed in her determination to reside the remainder of her days in the country from whence no persuasions could remove her; she regretted the loss of her childrens’ company, but did not expect young people should give up the world like herself, they parted with mutual regret, never, alas! to meet again. ',Mr.
Mr. and Mrs. Woodville proceeded on their journey, and arrived safely at Bath, where, on enquiry, he found many of his for¬ mer companions whom he had neglected, but the renewal of whose acquaintance he was anxious now to obtain. The succeeding day he sallied out to reconnoitre the company at the rooms, and was happy to meet several persons he knew, also some ladies who con¬ gratulated him on his marriage, and promised to pay their compliments to his lady. He . was accompanied home by two gentlemen, who dined with him, and not to dwell on un¬ interesting particulars, within a fortnight after their arrival at Bath they had a universal ac¬ quaintance; Mrs. Woodville’s beauty, Mrs. Woodville’s dress and carriages, were the uni¬ versal theme of admiration—she was engaged in all the fashionable parties, whilst Mr. Woodville fell in with his old associates, and gambled higher than ever.,This mode of life was regularly pursued from day to day for many weeks, without the leass reflection on either fide, of the large strides they
they were making towards dissipation and ruin: One night, however, Mrs. Woodville, who was by no means an adept in play, lost nearly five hundred pounds, the largeness of the sum startled her, she returned home opprest Snd unhappy, a gentleman was her creditor, ssie was not at that time possessed of half the mo¬ ney, nor did she like applying to her husband; ssie passed the night in the most cruel disqui¬ etude, ssie recollected all her losses and found they amounted to an immense sum, though ssie had not lost in one evening so consider¬ ably as on that night.,From reviewing her own conduct ssie passed to her hussiand’s, and judged from vari¬ ous circumstances that the depredations on his purse were still greater; a sew hours reflection worked an instantaneous change in her mind, ssie resolved to give up play, and the dissi¬ pated company ssie had hitherto engaged with, and by an ingenuous confession to her hussiand obtain the money to pay her debts of honor, assuring him they ssiould be the last ssie ever would contract. This laudable re¬ solution
solution flic pursued the next day, though with evident confusion and reluctance. Unfortu¬ nately nothing could have happened more mal-apropos, for Mr. Woodville had in that week lost many thousands, and was at that very moment considering how, or in what manner, to raise money to pay his own en¬ gagements, he therefore, for the first time since their marriage spoke both rudely and unkindly, blamed .her extravagance, and as¬ sured her just then he had not fifty pieces to command. Thunderstruck and mortified, poor Mrs. Woodville burst into tears, ac¬ knowledged her error, and detested the follies she had been guilty of. Affected by her sor¬ row, he bid her keep her resolutions, and in a day or two he would supply the sums she re¬ quested.,She left him overwhelmed with confusion and remorse; the vanity which unaccustomed splendour had raised and gratified she saw in its true light, and from that moment she de¬ termined to follow a new course of life: with¬ in three days Ms. Woodville procured mo¬ ney
ney and their debts were discharged. She ventured to propose spending their Christmas with their good mother at the Hall, but he absolutely declined it, and soon after carried her to London.,There every scheme of pleasure was pursued on a larger scale, he became acquainted, and joined in the parties of some of the highest rank, and most distinguished for their dissipa¬ tion and extravagance ; the consequences were obvious, and in a short time he experienced difficulties that plunged him into every mean scheme that gamblers are always subject to. Mrs. Woodville indeed kept her word, she gave up play, but she was compelled to have routs, balls, suppers, and all those expensive entertainments, by which women of fashion are distinguished, and in which they endeavour to outvie each other.,Whilst they were in the full career of plea¬ sures that did not accord with Mrs. Wood- ville’s inclinations, but which fashion and her* husband’s desires imposed upon her, they received
received an account from their steward of the sudden death of their good parent, at the Hall, after only three hours complaint in her head. This information was a great shock to both; Mr. Woodville respected and va¬ lued his mother greatly, his wife loved her most tenderly, and grieved sincerely, she be¬ sought him to go down, but he by no means thought it necessary to engage in melancholy scenes, his mother had always requested Ihe might be buried privately, and therefore the steward could perform every necessary duty. She was hurt at what she conceived a failure of respect to the memory of so worthy a pa¬ rent, and a want of decorum in the eyes of the world; but her remonstrances were in vain, he had so attached himself to a set of gay companions, that no considerations could in¬ duce him to leave them, altho’ want of affec¬ tion, and respect to his mother, when living was certainly not imputable to him. Her jointure was very acceptable both to him and his friends, and for a time relieved him from his difficulties, but it was a temporary assist¬,ance
ance only to himself and in a few months his affairs were greatly deranged.,He had for some time been intimate with two noblemen, who had no small interest in the administration, and had been extremely profuse in their offers of service to him. Mr. Woodville sensible of the great diminution of his fortune, now thought that interest might procure him a place under government of some consequence. Sanguine in his expec¬ tations he applied to them with all that ease and assurance of success he had been taught to look forward to; he was received with kindness, and flattered with the warmest pro¬ mises of being soon fettled in a handsome em¬ ployment : he returned home elated with the kindness of his friends, and expecting nothing less than two or three thousand a year; in con¬ sequence of which hopes, he put no limits to his expences; and of course, grew every day more involved, and his estates more deeply mortgaged. Time rolled on, Mr. Wood¬ ville paid due court to his noble friends, they were indeed now fd exceedingly busy he could,C,VOL. I.,not
=6,ELLEN AND JVLIA.,not often see them, but when he did, their former promises were renewed with a warmth that could leave no doubt upon his mind as to his being soon pleasantly situated.,He was now truly a dependant upon courtly favor, and to his infinite surprise very soon experienced the value of the friendship he re¬ lied upon. When application was made for proofs of their professions the gentlemen were never at home ; his cards were daily left, no notice was taken of them ; he grew uneasy and determined to fee them : He attended the next levee, and saw them at court,but there he found them surrounded by a crowd of courtiers, and needy dependants ; a very dis¬ tant bow was all the notice he could obtain. Fired with rage and indignation he returned home, and wrote an expoftulatory letter to each : The answers he received almost de¬ prived him of his reason, and annihilated hjs hopes for ever—It appeared they muse have consulted together, and fixed their mode for answering his application, the letters were so exactly alike. “ Nothing could be more pain¬ ful
fill to their feelings than being obliged to in¬ form their dear friend of their ill success with the minister. A general election was at hand, the great man was obliged to attend to the recommendations of powerful members, they were his particular friends that he could de¬ pend upon in the upper house, he was com¬ pelled therefore, however contrary to his in¬ clinations, to seek for assistance from those who had great County interest, and they must be obliged." A few general professions of friendship which meant nothing, and a freez¬ ing politeness, concluded the letters.,Never was man more irritated than Mr. Woodville, his eyes were opened at once to fee the dupe he had been made ; his fortune lavished on the dissipated and ungrateful, and reduced from opulence to difficulties and dis¬ grace ; his estate was mortgaged to its full value, and, on a review of his affairs, little more remained than his wife's fortune, her settlement of four hundred a year, and his town house and furniture.,C 2 Mrs,
Mrs. Woodville had juft laid-in of a fine girl, he felt bitter remorse on reflecting he might possibly have a large family without the means of providing for them suitable to their birth, his eftate was entailed upon the male heirs, and should he have no son, de¬ scended to a very distant branch of the fa¬ mily, consequently his girls had only their mother’s fortune, and what he could fave from his income, which was now reduced to a very slender pittance comparatively to what he had possessed.,His father always resided in the country, and extremely averse to politics and all party interests, preferred the title of a plain country gentleman to all the brilliant offers which Tiad been made to him, he lived for his fa¬ mily, and his tenants, to whom he was ever a father and a counsellor, and was equally be¬ loved and respected. After his death, when Mr. Woodville came into the possession of the family eftate and his aunt’s fortune, he was too eager in the pursuit of pleasure to pay any attention to the interest he might have
have acquired in the county, and which now he found, when too late, was the only road to ministerial favor.,Distracted at a situation ib replete with mortifications, he could not bear the idea of remaining in England, both pride and pru¬ dence suggested the necessity of living abroad on a frugal plan, he knew the sweetness of his wife's temper, and her extreme affection for him never would suffer her to upbraid him; and although the disclosure of the derange¬ ment of his affairs must give her great dis¬ quietude, he was persuaded that her only he had to look up to for his future happiness: as soon therefore as Mrs. Woodville was per¬ fectly recovered, he made an ingenuous con¬ fession of the vexations which preyed upon his mind, and consulted her upon the pro- priety of leaving England for some time; she heard him with much less emotion than he expected, in truth, fire had been preparing her mind for some time to bear such a dis¬ closure as was now made, and therefore^ however painful the certainty of what she dreaded, her constant apprehensions had,C 3 made
made the evil lighter to her feelings than he could have hoped for, and her ready acqui¬ escence with his plan without a single word of reproach to him, and throwing the blame on her own folly and imprudence only, en¬ gaged his warmest gratitude and affection.,Every thing was soon fettled for their de¬ parture to the continent, Mrs. Woodville wrote to take le^ve of her uncle and aunt, with whom she had constantly corresponded, and who were now in hourly expectation of their son’s arrival from India. They had few friends, besides Mr. and Mrs. Sandford, to leave behind, for as their acquaintance lay entirely among persons of fashion, who were too polite to insult people whose circum¬ stances were depressed either by visiting, or profefling esteem, where neither pride, inte¬ rest, or pleasure could be gratified; they were permitted quietly to depart without the smallest regret; on the contrary, every one thought the poor creatures were extremely right to go abroad with the shabby remains of their former splendour, when no longer in a
a situation to be respected at home. Thus then, Mr. Woodville, his wife, and child, with two servants, a male and female, set off for Calais, and from thence went on to Lisle, in the neighbourhood of which he designed to settle.,CHAP. IV.,MR. WOODVILLE went daily round the environs in search of a retired situ¬ ation, chance at last conducted him to a spot suitable to his wishes ; about nine miles from the city he saw a small house, that lay buried among trees, entirely secluded from public view, aOd which only curiosity like his would have explored; an elderly couple resided in it to prevent its falling into decay, and look after the gardens which were of much greater extent than could have been expected from,Ca the
the diminutive size of the house. On en¬ quiry he was told the owner of the estate was lately dead, and probably it would be let out to rent, as the heir was young, and the gen¬ tleman who had the care of his fortune did not chuse to lay out money in repairs. On this information Mr. Woodville applied to the person alluded to, and every satisfaction being given by both parties, the agreement was made and he took possession of the house in less than a month from their arrival at Lisle. In this solitary retreat, without a sin¬ gle acquaintance, all company being excluded, they lived unknowing and unknown. The old folks they found in the house they re¬ tained in it, to procure them necessaries, as their own servants were strangers to the lan¬ guage, and they found them both honest and useful.,They had resided near five year^ cut off from all society, when an event took place that induced them to revisit England. Two years after they were fettled Mrs. Wood¬ ville was brought to bed of a fine boy, which
which gave new life to her husband’s senti¬ ments ; he had now an heir, he could fell timber, and receive other advantages from his estates, which might empower him to provide better for his girls or younger chil¬ dren ; his melancholy subsided, he doated on his boy, and his temper every day grew more placid, and consequently the whole family was happier; but, alas! short-sighted mor¬ tals as we are, events which appear to us as productive of happiness often prove our bit¬ terest curse. This darling son when nearly three years old took the small pox, the pa¬ rents were distracted, they were obliged to have medical assistance, which proved in vain, to save him, a younger child, a daughter, caught the infection, and both expired on the same day.,No language can describe the anguish, the distress which both parents, more particu¬ larly the father, endured: he spent whole days in a small wood that lay behind the house, scarcely took any sustenance, nor could he bear the sight of the two elder girls,,C 5 whom.
whom providence had spared from that fatal disorder. Poor Mrs. Woodville though deeply afflicted, kissed the rod of correction with patience and humility, she was grateful to heaven for the recovery os her daughters, and sought by every means possible to alle¬ viate the affliction of her husband, but nei¬ ther her endearments, time, nor reason, could restore his peace, his belt hopes were anni¬ hilated for ever, he said, and when she hinted that Providence might poffibly bless them with another son, he grew quite furious, and alked her if she wanted to have him continu¬ ally curst with false hopes, that he might ex¬ perience the greater misery.,Upwards of a month had passed in this miserable way, anxiety and sorrow had worn him to a mere shadow, his temper was irri¬ table to a degree that terrified his unhappy wife every moment for the consequences, and considerably hurt her health; when, one morning, after being shut up some hours alone, he came abruptly into her apartment and told her to- prepare for her return to England,
Engbtfiid, he would no longer stay in that de¬ tested country which had made him unhappy for ever, he w^uld seek some wild uninhabited corner in Wales, to bury himself from the world. Mrs. Woodville knew it was in vain to reason or ex postulate, she quietly acquiesced, and in a very short time they landed once more in their native country, and proceeded directly on their road to Hereford, where he proposed leaving his family until-he had found out a place agreeable to his wishes. Mr. Woodville had heard of the romantic scenes round Cum¬ berland and Westmoreland, thither he bent his course, and,after a disagreeable journey of upwards of twenty miles, through a desolate country, where only a few wretched huts were thinly scattered; he came to a solitary miserable alehouse j uft as night came on, and impeded his farther progress. Excessively fatigued and dis¬ satisfied that no cottage was found to answer his wishes, he alighted, and entered this hovel to pass the night. He found five or fix boors drunk and noisy, one broken table, and two benches were all the furniture, no floor but the bare earth, nor any provisions but bread, cheese, and onions.,C 6,The
The uncooth inhabitants gathered *round him, and asked a hundred questions, in lan¬ guage scarcely intelligible. Fie asked for a bed, there was none, in the next, and besides the one they were in there only room, there was some clean straw, he might lay down there. To another this situation had been deplorable, to Mr. Woodville it was luxury; he was in love with misery; this place was congenial to his feelings; and after drinking plentifully of ale, he threw himself on some straw, as did likewise the old man and his son in one corner, the boors in another of the same room, or rather shed, for the straw was on the cold earth.,Such was the situation of a man, born and accustomed to every luxurious indulgence fortune could procure! Now, by folly, dissipa¬ tion, an impetuous disposition, a wrong judg- mentyand without reason or stability to calm his passions and direct his mind; from one extreme he had flown to another, and hated all mankind, because he had been unwise in his choice of companions, and met the dis¬ appointments and ingratitude a wrong selec¬ tion
tion of such will invariably incur. Impatient under the dispensations of heaven he indulged in unavailing sorrow, and shunned the sight of those whom he thought happier than him¬ self, whilst thousands of miserable families, languished for a small share of those blessings he enjoyed, and which, from the misanthropy of his disposition, was in his erroneous judg¬ ment of no estimation; for he had still suffi¬ cient fortune to have enabled his family to appear in the world genteelly, though not splendidly, and- was blest with an amiable wife and two sweet children 5 but, alas! to a discontented mind, the greatest blessings are perverted, and Mr. Woodville, with every power to enjoy comfort, was, in his own opi¬ nion, the most wretched of mankind.,In the morning when they arose from their cold straw, and assembled to eat bread, and drink ale, for their breakfast, he enquired of the boors if any cottages were to be had in a solitary retired place. One of them answered, he knew a house now to be let, solitary enough, for nobody would live in it, which might be had for a trifle, though there were the best gardens belonging to it, of any place in the
z? ELLEN AND JULIA,,the whole County. This information was eagerly caught at by Mr. Woodville, and he offered the man some money to go with him and point out the place ; they accordingly fat off together, he walking his horse by the fide of the man.,They travelled over two or three frightful hills ; but on descending from the last, down a gradual declivity, they came to one of the most beautiful graft-plats nature ever formed j at one end of which, the ri,'1Iil|—<’*1^ Eden glided gently through die vale, in a flat country to¬ wards Kendal; on the other fide was a thick wocd, at the bottom of a high hill, from whence you had a prospect of the sea, and an extensive view of the country; on the skirts of the wood enveloped among trees, flood a large old building, which appeared to have been formerly a very handsome structure, but was now falling to decay; this the boor pointed out as the house he had mentioned, and was entirely uninhabited—the gardens were extensive on one fide of the house, and several little walks and vistas were cut in the wood, but all was in a rude neglected state, and
and made a most uncomfortable appearance, no house or cottage being near it for several miles.,Desolate as it was, it pleased Mr. Wood¬ ville, he got intelligence where to apply and and setting offimmediately for Kendal, easily sound the owner of the mansion, and pur¬ chased it for a very small sum, being so en¬ tirely out of repair. He now took possession of the house, but he found great difficulty in procuring the different workmen to make it habitable, so strongly prepossessed was the poor peasantry that it was haunted by evil spirits ; however, money and persuasions, in¬ duced some to enter, and, in a few days, find¬ ing they were not disturbed, others followed their example, and though not divested of their terrors, assumed sufficient courage to go on with their work in a body together.,In about six weeks the house and grounds made a decent appearance, but it was still gloomy from the size of the rooms, the small windows, and being surrounded with trees, whose
whose dark shades when in leaf prevented every ray from the enlivening fun to cheer the inhabitants, and in the winter the roaring of the distant sea, the wind whistling through the trees, the loud echoes from the lofty rooms all together, were sufficient to create melan¬ choly, and inspire horror.,Mr. Woodville having compleated the alterations he designed, beheld all these dis¬ advantages with a gloomy satisfaction. — Here, cried he, I may live without the curse •of society, enjoy rest and quiet for the re¬ mainder of my days, far from all those delu¬ sive pleasures, and deceitful friends, that have ruined my fortune and destroyed my peaces He lost no time in fending for his family, and his poor wife, with her two children, and faithful servants, undertook the tedious and dreary journey, and at length, almost dead with fatigue, arrived at Woodland Castle, the name of their future residence. Prepared as she was to expect a solitary mansion, she shuddered on entering the gloomy rooms, and felt a repulsive horror creep through her,veins:
veins: she regretted her little cottage near Lisle, and in the moment she embraced her husband she burst into tears; he coldly wel¬ comed her, and the sweet little girls, and pre¬ sently entered on the regulation of his house¬ hold : a strong girl was added to assist the jmaid servant, and a man to work in the gar¬ dens, which were stocked plentifully with ve¬ getables for the family use ; this man was also to market for them, though he intended keeping cows and poultry sufficient to supply their table. Every establishment was soon fixed,-and for twelve years their life was al¬ most uniformly the fame.,Mr. Woodville spent his mornings in rambling round the country, whilst his ami¬ able wife instructed her little girls, the only pleasure and amusement of her life ; they met at dinner, after which he shut himself up in his study ’till night, partook of a light supper, and constantly retired to reft at eleven o’clock. His gloomy disposition got strength every day; he hated the idea of society, seldom spoke, and treated his children with that se¬ verity
verity of manners which inspired them with terror, and repulsed affection.,Within the first three years of their resi¬ dence Mrs. Woodville had the misfortune to loose her worthy uncle and aunt at differ¬ ent periods, Captain Sandford, their son, had during her residence in France, married an heiress of large fortune in Ireland, but his re¬ giment being ordered to the East Indies, they went there to reside, and although he now and then wrote to her, she looked upon herself as cut off from him for ever, and without a single relation or friend in the world. Sad situation! for an amiable woman, formed both by person and manners to have graced the first and belt societies in the king¬ dom. Her two beautiful girls,- Ellen and Julia were now grown up to be companions and repay, by their duty and affection, those tender anxieties which a mother ever feels for the objects of^er dearest care : yet, not¬ withstanding equal attention had been payed to the formation of their minds, and cultiva¬ tion of their talents, there was a^marked dif¬ ference
ference in the disposition and sentiments of the two lifters. . Ellen, the eldest:, at this time turned of eighteen, was tall, and elegantly formed,- a fair complexion, with dark blue eyes, good features, and light brown hair, rendered her extremely vain of her handsome person, though that vanity could receive no other gratification than what her glass and the maid servants supplied; she had much of the im¬ petuous disposition of her father, nor could all her mother's care and admonitions get the better of a haughtiness, a supercilious pride, with which she treated the servants, and not unfrequently her mother and lifter; this pride was increased by the little notice her father took of her, as he sometimes con¬ descended to let her accompany him in a morning ramble, from which her sifter was always excluded.,Mrs. Woodville, brought up in the coun¬ try, had in her uncle's library met with many old Romances, as well as a few modern No¬ vels, equally romantic and improbable; she delighted much in this kind of reading. —- Dangerous
Dangerous study for young minds without a proper selection! and although when she grew older her good sense taught her to distinguish properly between such trifling productions and the more useful knowledge gained from the Belles Lettres, yet still as an amusement for an idle hour foe frequently resorted to those books for entertainment. She had, previous to leaving London, purchased a good many Romances and Novels, when in France foe added to her stock, and Mr. Woodville being too indifferent to his do¬ mestic affairs, was careless in what manner foe pasled her solitary hours. Her books accompanied her to Woodland Castle, and foe sometimes permitted her daughters the use of them—fatal indulgence, as it proved to one of them, whose mind naturally proud and romantic, too eagerly adopted the senti¬ ments of the different heroines, and conceived the highest disgust at her own situation, which secluded her from such delightful adventures as the world afforded to young women, hand¬ some like herself.,Julia
Julia, the youngest daughter, was in her seventeenth year, and extremely unlike her sifter; she ,vas about the middle size, deli¬ cately formed, her features were not regular, her complexion not brilliant, but a perfect: sweetness with great sensibility and a grave cast of countenance rendered her one of the most interesting objects imaginable l it was impossible to fee her without a desire to be¬ hold her again, and a with to deserve her esteem. Her mind was correspondent with her person, with a natural share of excellent understanding, she had spared no pains to profit by the confined education she received; she selected such books only as could im¬ prove, and admired no characters, but such as placed virtue in its most amiable light, and was equally free from the absurdities of ro¬ mance, or the pernicious follies delineated in modern Novels. Her own good fense taught her a discrimination in reading, and every virtue that could adorn a woman appeared growing up to perfection in the engaging Julia. She felt for her mother’s unhappy situation; she pitied the^defects of her father’s 5 temper.
temper; and instead of murmuring at the re¬ cluse life she seemed doomed to, endeavoured to exert herself, and by constant cheerfulness and good humour contribute to the satisfac¬ tion of her mother, and sometimes for a mo¬ ment enliven the features of her father, but though now and then he suffered the severity of his countenance to relax, he was not pleased with it. Ellen, whose haughty air and not unfrequently sullen temper, hurt Mrs. Wood¬ ville, was by him Applauded and encouraged.,Such was the situation of the family when this book commenced, and to which what has been related was a necessary prelude, to elu¬ cidate these memoirs, and explain those cir¬ cumstances, which arose from that situation so described.,CHAP.
CHAP. V.,N E morning in the beginning of May'■_~-¬’' Mr. Woodville called for Ellen to ac¬ company him in a walk ; she, glad of any change of scene, readily obeyed. They as¬ cended the hill, and viewed the beautiful prospects with an apathy that precluded ob¬ servation or pleasure; they walked on far¬ ther than they had ever gone before, ’till they .came to a descent that brought them to a dif¬ ferent part of the river, and where the hang¬ ing hills and frightful rocks, with great chasms that appeared to threaten destruction every moment to those who came too near them, for the first time broke the silence, by Ellen’s exclamation of terror, at the scene before her^ Fear
Fear not, said Mr. Woodville, these rocks have stood for ages, perhaps in the state you fee them, and unless an earthquake should shake them, may last for ages to come. — They advanced towards a large opening that was nearly at the bottom of one ragged rock, and stood for some time viewing it. I should like to enter that cavity, if I thought there was no danger, said Ellen. Danger, there can be none, replied her father, but ’tis an idle curiosity that can receive no gratification, as there is nothing to view; nor does it, I be¬ lieve, extend far, at least I suppose the open¬ ing can receive but little benefit from the light to guide us. I wish, my dear Sir, an¬ swered she, some future day we could return with alight. Well, well, cried he peevishly, perhaps we may. They walked on again in a profound silence, until their walk was ter¬ minated by the ruins of an old building that appeared to have been an Abbey, or some religious house, from the courts and different parts of the buildings that remained. Ellen, who had never been on this fide of the river, was very inquisitive to know what, and to whom
whom this place belonged,butMr. Woodville, who had frequently walked here, and in whom all curiosity was dead, and to whom the least trouble was insupportable, repressed her inquiries with an angry look, and hastily re¬ turned towards home.,When arrived there, though extremely fa¬ tigued with her walk, Ellen repeated to her mother and lifter the wonders she had seen, and, when alone with Julia, earnestly re¬ quested she would accompany her the follow¬ ing morning to the rocks, which, to oblige her sifter, she promised.,When breakfast was over the succeeding day, the sifters took their morning walk; Ellen had previously provided herself with a tinder-box, candle, &c. when they came to the cavity which was the object of her curi¬ osity, she had some difficulty to persuade Julia to enter, left any accident should befal them, and render her mother wretched, but the other would hot be repulsed, and there-,vol. i. '°"' D sore
fore striking a light, and securing the tinder box, they with some trouble entered thro* the opening, which, after a few yards, grew wider and loftier, and at length they came to a broad place which had two narrow openings farther on: They went through the largest, and walked a considerable way until on one side of the rock they observed a door, closed as if it led to a different path.,They now stopt, hesitated, and debated whether they should attempt the door, or hasten back; but Julia, who had much cou¬ rage and resolution, and whose curiosity now began to be excited, said, I cannot think this place was ever inhabited, perhaps it might formerly have had a communication with the old Abbey you described to me: She then tried the door, but it resisted her efforts to pull it open;-, they stood for a mo¬ ment vexed and irresolute, when suddenly from an opening bn the other side an old wo¬ man came forth with a lamp in her hand. Mutually surprised all three stood gazing on each
each other j Julia was the first to recover from the terror which had seized on them, and addressing the woman, if you reside in or near this place, pardon a curiosity which has induced my sister and self to explore these passages without the least design of intruding upon any one; but if actuated by the same motive with ourselves, you came here by accident, pray tell us where these chasms and paths terminate.,Whilst Julia was speaking the woman gazed on them with a fixed astonishment for some moments, at length—I know not how to an¬ swer you, Madam, said she, but if you will go into that opening, and rest yourselves, I will come to you in a few minutes. They did as she desired, and found a square place with a seat cut out from the rock, and ano¬ ther door on one side. They had rested but a very short time under a good deal of per¬ turbation, when she returned, and desiring them to follow her, they entered the passage which the first door had concealed, and turn¬ ing to the right, another door was opened,D 2 into
into a very decent apartment, neatly furnished, at the upper end of which fat a woman lean¬ ing her. head on a pillow; she tried to raise her¬ self on their entrance, but funk again into her chair. Extremely surprised they hastened to her, and stammered out some apologies for their intrusion ; she held out her hand and burst into tears—both were affected but Julia’s sensibility was deeply wounded—Kiss¬ ing her hand, pardon us, dear Madam, for¬ give our curiosity, if it is productive of pain to you we will instantly retire, and be assured your residence here shall remain an inviolable secret with us.,The stranger eagerly gazed on her with a fixed but languid look, and faintly said. Pro¬ vidence has doubtless sent you here to com - fort me in my last moments; unworthy as I am of its favor, I trust my penitence will be accepted : She paused, seeing they were both in tears. I am dying, my dear young ladies, added she, life is ebbing very fast, a few days And my sorrows will cease for ever. She ap¬ peared
peared very faint, the old woman gave her some drops, which seemed to revive her:— They were both so overwhelmed with asto¬ nishment and pity that neither could speak for some time, but Ellen seeing she was a little recovered, said, pray take comfort, Ma • dam, perhaps if you had proper medical assistance you might regam your health. Ah ! no, said she, shaking her head, I neither can nor wish to live, I look forward to the hour of my dissolution as the happiest of my life, as a release from misery and bitter self-con¬ demnation. She then asked, to what happy chance she was indebted for the pleasure of seeing them, not having, she said, beheld any human face but her old friend,)1Iil<>Jj''s these nine years. Ellen gave her a brief account of what has been related, and congratulated her¬ self on the curiosity which had thus brough them together. Before the stranger could reply Julia reminded her sister that their long absence might possibly alarm their mother, therefore, however reluctant, it was neces¬ sary they should soon return. You have a,D 3 , mother
mother then, cried the lady, and a mother deserving the love and respect of such chil¬ dren ? O, God, what happiness is ber’s! Go, my dear young ladies, let not a mother feel anxiety for your safety, yet how earnestly do I wish to see you again. My dearest Ma¬ dam, said Julia tenderly, permit me to make you a proposal, my mother is the belt of wo¬ men, confide your secret to her, accept her assistance, condescend to become an inmate of our house, you may yet recover. I see your mother! I become an inmate of your house ? Gracious Heaven ! what a proposal. No, for heaven’s fake preserve my secret, to you only let me be known, if you can return, and I live, you shall know my story; if not, if the lamp of life should be extinguished, my old friend, who has buried herself with me, is my only care; if you can serve her, I shall bless the chance that brought you here. They both assured her of their return the following morning, and of complying with her wishes in every respect: the old woman undertook to guide them round the rock a much nearer,way
way than they had entered, and going through a few long paslages they were surprised to find themselves brought by a very narrow cavity they could with difficulty creep out from, to the fide of the wood behind their • own house.,Their absence had been much longer than usual, and Mrs. Woodville had for some time been uneasy j they acknowledged they had strayed beyond the distance they first in¬ tended, but was in no danger of losing thega^ selves, which she was apprehensive of,Both longed for thr following morning, but their motives and sentiments were ex¬ ceedingly different — Ellen was dying with curiosity to know the stranger’s ftory, with¬ out much feeling for her situation, whilst the gentle Julia conjectured some heavy misfor¬ tunes , brought on by a mistaken conduct, and which had destroyed her peace, obliged her to shun the world, and must render it very painful to narrate her ftory. What right have we, said she to her sifter, to oblige her by an,D 4 improper
improper curiosity, to wound her own bo¬ som, and submit to the humiliation of a de¬ grading confession of her errors ? Ah, my dear Ellen, we will not hear her; let us, if possible, administer comfort, but never lessen the respect we owe to the unfortunate by requiring so painful a task. Indeed you are very simple, Julia, answered Ellen, I would not for the world but know her story, 1 dare say we shall hear, many strange adventures, such as we read of in our books. You are mistaken, my dear sister, such incidents are rarely met with in common life; you know our mother assures us those stories are mostly fictitious, and entirely the work of the writer’s ideas. You may think so, answered Ellen, with an incredulous air, but I am sure, were we permitted to mix in the world, we should have as many lovers, though perhaps not all princes, as Cassandra, Artemisia, or the Char¬ lottes, Louisas, and Matildas that are living now. There is nothing I think so provoking as my own horrid name; because I was the eldest I must be called Ellen forsooth, I wish,I
I had been born in France I might then have had a pretty name : O how I envy you^ for being christened Julia. Indeed, said Julia, laughing, ’tis an advantage I am by no means vain of and could I give it you, it would be very much at your service. You are a strange girl, said Ellen, but I dare say the lady in the rock has some charming romantic name, or I would not give myself the trouble to hear her story. Ah ! sister, cried Julia, do not speak so lightly about her, my heart bleeds for her distresses, and I only wish to re¬ lieve her without being impertinently curious. As their sentiments did not accord they drop¬ ped the subject-,The next morning when they were getting ready for their morning’s walk, Mr. Wood¬ ville called on Ellen to accompany him, a request she had hitherto considered as a dis¬ tinguished favor, was now particularly disa¬ greeable ; she told him she was juft preparing to walk with her sister; but with a sternness not to be resisted he ordered her to attend; him instantly: Vexed and mortified Hie had.,D 5 yet
yet no power to withstand a command so de¬ cisive) and was compelled to obey, after re¬ questing her fitter not to go without her; but Julia felt herself so much interested for the reclufe, and for the disappointment she would feel if neither came, that though unwilling to disoblige her sifter, she could not repel the delire she had to keep her appointment.,When therefore her father and fitter left the house, she hastened to the wood, easily found the passage, where nothing impeded her steps, and soon entered the apartment of the Lady: She was extremely shocked at be¬ holding a very visible alteration for the worse: the other rejoiced to .see her, attempted to rife but it was an attempt only. You see, my dear young lady, said she, with a faint smile, you see my power will not second my incli¬ nation, my weakness increases hourly, and this morning I had but little hopes I should ever fee you again. She enquired after Ellen, Julia accounted for her absence, and with the greatest tenderness besought her to have asiist- i 6 ance.
ance. You are too good my amiable girl, said (he, to feel for a person, a stranger, under such suspicious circumstances as I appear in, nor would I for the world deceive you into a false opinion of me ; I am unworthy of your concern, I am a miserable guilty wretch. — Dear Madam, cried Julia interrupting her, do not embitter the pleasure I feel in seeing you by such cruel reflections, tell me only how I can serve you,, and by what means I can administer consolation to your mind. — Neither, replied flic, is in, your power, my health has been long declining, and for my mind, no balm can be found to heal the stings of conscious guilt; my sufferings are great, my repentance sincere, and I trust the ^.1- mighty will extend his forgiveness to me,, great as my crimeshave been. O my good girl, added she,, taking Julia’s hand who fat drowned in tears,, you are young and ami¬ able, watch over every sentiment of your heart, guard against that tender sensibility you possess, let not pride nor a false opinion of your own virtue and resolution deceive you ;,D 6 cure
our boasted strength and wisdom too often throw us into temptations, that prove the fallacy of human judgment by our inability to resist them. She paused, and looking with extreme tenderness on her young visitor, I had intended to have related my story, but on consideration I found myself unequal to the task, I have therefore employed myself, since the hour you left me yesterday, in wri¬ ting it, I have finished the horrid tale, it has wrung my very soul by the repetition, but let it warn you to avoid my errors by which my happiness was destroyed for ever, and those much dearer than myself hurried to an untimely grave — she clalped her hands and burst into tears.,Poor Julia tried to sooth, to comfort her, thoughdittle less affected; she took a packet from thsMrawer and giving it into. Julia’s hand, let Hie perusal be a pharos to guard you from this delusions of the world, and more particularly from that gratification which at¬ tends youthful vanity; and, O my dear young lady.
ELLEN AND JULIA.,61,lady, should you ever, by any happy chance, discover the person to whom you will find a letter addressed, tell her, O tell her, you saw me in the arms of death, bitterly deploring my crimes, and with my last breath imploring heaven to bless and preserve her: Say to her, added she, grasping Julia’s hand with streaming eyes, fay that her wretched mother implores her not to hate her memory, that she dies a victim to sorrow and remorse, and humbly trusts her punishment may be in this world only. Overwhelmed with contending passions and agitations her feeble frame could ill support, she fell into strong convulsions; Julia and her attendant were frightened to death, and whilst they were endeavouring to support her, to their utter astonishment Mr. Woodville and Ellen entered the room.,The poor lady, still insensible, excited some emotion even in his breast, and for a mo¬ ment the inflexibility of his countenance gave way to pity. When the convulsions left her she was so exhausted as to take not the smallest,notice
notice of the company; she was laid upon the bed which was in the room with very lit¬ tle appearance of life. Julia surprised at the appearance of her "father, in a low voice re- quested they would follow her to the outer room, she repeated what had passed and pro¬ duced the packet given to her care. Mr. Woodville, struck with wonder, proposed their return; in the course of twelve years he had never felt so much interested by any event as the present, but Julia, apprehensive that the poor lady might be shocked at the presence of her father, thought it most pru¬ dent to go in first—file advanced to the bed, the servant was giving her drops—Ah I Miss cried she sobbing, my mistress, my poor mis¬ tress ; she could fay no more. Julia took her hand, it had a death-like coldness; she opened her eyes, and after several efforts to speak,, "all that is here I give to her, this picture, pointing to her breast, is yours, wear it ever, forgive, pray for me, pity me. Great God ! added file with fervor, in thy mercy pardon my crimes,, and receive a repentant sinner.”,She
She said no more; with eyes lifted to heaven her lips only moving, in a few moments she ceased to breathe, her eyes were closed for ever 1,CHAP. VI.,Unaccustomed to such dreadful scenes, Julia fell on the bed entirely senseless, the old woman's exclamations of grief brought in Mr. Woodville and Ellen, they flew to administer reliefs and Julia soon shewed signs of returning life, she was lifted from the bed to a chair, when a violent gush of tears relieved her oppressed heart, and brought her to more composure. Mr. Wood¬ ville flood like one transfixed by horror, gazing on the lifeless corps, and starting as from a dream, when the woman asked Julia what
what was to be done ; she, poor creature, appeared incapable from grieG and want of strength, to be of much use on such a solemn occasion. True, cried Mr. Woodville, what is to be done with the body, is there no di- rections? I believe there is a paper sealed, in that drawer, which my mistress frequently told me whenever Hie died I was to carry to the parson of the parish, but this morning the dear lady had a terrible fit, and I thought would have died then, but she recovered a little and told me, if the young ladies should: come this day whether she was alive or dead the paper mutt,•<Zz''be given to them, but if they did not return, I was to go to the parson.,Ellen eagerly examined the drawer, and. found the sealed paper, she made no scruple of opening it, there was a bank note for twenty pounds inclosed, with the following- words written on a separate paper.,“By a strange concomitance of melancholy events a poor unfortunate woman has been driven
driven to seek an asylum in a solitary cave, from whence she never more will emerge into the world, Hie entreats for charity the rites of a decent interment, the twenty pound note is to defray the expences, which are to be much within compass of that sum, the plainest fu¬ neral possible to convey this wretched body to the earth, the spirit, I humbly hope, thro' the mercy of a gracious God will be received in heaven. Whatever overplus remains I beg the worthy clergyman, who performs the last duties for me, will accept. Whatever furni¬ ture, linen, or cloaths I have in this place I give to Sarah Mills, my good and faithful servant; also, whatever money shall be found in my little cabinet; recommending her to the care and attention of the good and worthy.”,MARY DANVERS.,Addressed {<fstCce<‘f to the Clergyman,of this Parish.>,1Iil<'’*‘',When
When this melancholy address was read, Mr. Woodville advised a strict: observance of it, and ordered the woman to convey it in- stantly to the parson, for he would have no hand in it. Poor Julia felt the deepest af- fliction that foe could not be permitted to at¬ tend on the unfortunate deceased, but her fa¬ ther peremptorily commanded her to return home, and visit that place no more. The old woman hearing this wept aloud, but going to the bed foe untied the picture which the dying lady had given to Julia and giving it to her, dear, dear young lady, take the pic¬ ture my beloved mistress gave you with her last breath. Ah ! cried foe, wringing her hands, foe was once young, beautiful, and good, like you ; God grant you may never know sorrows like hers. O, my dear lady, you have now payed for all! Julia with an emotion foe could not suppress, caught her hand. On my knees, dear Sir, let me entreat one favor ? What is it ? asked he coldly. To per¬ mit this good woman, when foe has attended her mistress to the grave, and fulfilled her melancholy
melancholy duties, permit her, I beseech you, to call on me and satisfy my mind that every particular wish of the deceased has been strictly attended to. On one condition, re¬ plied he, I grant it, that this woman vows ne¬ ver to name me, or any part of my family, as being acquainted with this cave or her mis¬ tress ; in short, that she never presumes to mention us. I do promise, worthy Sir, said she, I never will, let me but have the blessing of feeing that dear young lady, again and I swear to keep your orders strictly. *Tis well, replied he, then when all is over come to Woodland Castle and enquire for Anthony, he will have orders concerning you. He then commanded his daughters to accompany him, Julia took one more last look of the de¬ parted, and almost suffocated with grief left the melancholy spot with an aching heart.,When they returned to the castle Mrs. Woodville was surprised to fee them together, and with all the marks of sorrow in Julia’s face and perturbation in the others. She ea¬ gerly
gerly enquired the cause. Mr. Woodville withdrew to Ids study, having first demanded from his daughter the packet addressed and en¬ trusted to her; it was with great reluctance she obeyed the mandate ; ignorant of its con¬ tents she was apprehensive she had done wrong by mentioning it, but it was the impulse of the moment, and she was obliged to comply with commands never disputed, though very repugnant to her inclinations.,Mrs. Woodville, whose curiosity was greatly excited, now requested an explanation of what had passed. Julia entered into a detail of the whole whilst her tears streamed afresh at the recollection of the fad scenes; nor was her mother unmoved. Alas! said she, what¬ ever the poor woman's faults were, surely nine years seclusion in such a place, with re¬ morse preying on her heart, was punishment more severe than her greatest enemies could have wished for. Julia produced the picture, it was two miniatures inclosed in a large gold cafe : One side an elegant looking man in re¬ gimentals
gimentals; the other, a lovely girl apparently about eight or ten years old. Ellen viewed it with envy. This present would scarcely have been yours, said she haughtily, but for my father’s ill nature in keeping me back. Per¬ haps not, sifter, replied the other, I think in¬ deed you are as much entitled to it as my¬ self ; suppose we present it to our mother in truft for us both ? As you please, said Ellen coldly. Mrs. Woodville, to conciliate mat¬ ters, accepted the offer ; perhaps, said she, the packet your father has will give us informa¬ tion who these portraits are intended for, I feel already so interested for the unhappy lady, that I long to peruse the papers. Her name, Mary, said Ellen, gives one but an in¬ different opinion of her birth, ’tis such a vul¬ gar appellation. Name 1 repeated her mo¬ ther, what judgment can you form from a name ? A vast deal, answered she, all per¬ sons of fashion are distinguished by being called-. My dear Ellen, cried Mrs. Woodville, interrupting her, I cannot bear to hear you talk so absurdly, some of the first rank in this kingdom are Marys, Bettys Su¬ sans
sans, Dorothys. O shocking, said Ellen, in her turn interrupting her mother, such horrid names for persons of high rank can never be ; we never read of such I am sure in any of our books. I have often told you, replied her mother coldly, that those books are the works of fancy, that the names, inci¬ dents, and uncommon adventures, have no existence but in the writer’s brain, and are in¬ tended as a relaxation for an idle hour, not to influence your conduct or judgment far¬ ther than to inspire you with a love of virtue and an abhorrence of vice. If we are to be¬ lieve every thing fictitious, answered Ellen, we can as little profit by them as receive any injury; however, we shall fee what kind of a story this Mrs. Mary Danvers will make, and if hers is a fanciful tale also. Julia’s mild eyes reproved her filter’s petulant and un¬ feeling answer, but she was silent, and waited with extreme impatience for her father’s re¬ turn. At length he entered the room with a gloom and horror on his countenance that caused them to shrink with terror — giving,the
the papers into the hands of Julia, read them with attention, profit by the story, and learn to estimate vour own happiness in being se¬ cluded from a world of deceit, villainy, and extreme wickedness. Saying this he left them and hastily retired. Julia gave the pa¬ pers to her mother, she opened and read the following memoirs.,CHAP. VIL,My dear young ladies,,the verge of the grave, and near to the awful moment when all hearts are open, and all secrets known, I bless the hand that guided you to my wretched cave, that I might behold the pitying eye of innocence once more before I leave the world for ever, and tha^ my death, the consequence of guilt and
7i,ELLEN AND JULIA.,and shame, may impress on your youthful minds this awful and important lesion, that vice is sure to be attended by discovery, shame, contempt,and remorse; and that a strict and uniform practice of virtue, and an ob¬ servance of our several duties, is the only road to universal esteem, heart-felt content, and everlasting happiness hereafter. Unable to repeat the story I promised you, and fearful lest death should* deprive me of the power to write every particular, I hasten to the pain¬ ful task, which I consider as the last act of my life, and a deserved humiliation.,My father was a Baronet in the west of England, not less distinguished for his large estate than for his truly respectable character. My mother died in my infancy, leaving only a son of five years old, and myself, just turned of two. When arrived at a proper age my brother was sent to Winchester, and myself to a capital school in London. At this school I was taught the usual superficial accomplish¬ ments without any particular attention to my morals.
morals or temper 3 if I performed my tasks well I was entitled to praise, and was gra¬ tified by being held up as an example for imitation. Thus the feeds of vanity and self consequence were early planted in my mind, and laid the foundation for subsequent errors.,When I anived at the age of seventeen I left school to live with my father, who had taken a town house for the winter, that I might have some amusement previous to residing in the country. My brother had a commission in the guards, he did not live with my father but visited us daily. One day he brought with him a gentleman of fashion and fortune, a native of Ireland, who was likewise a M g-r in the army : this gentleman’s exterior was e ccedingly prepossessing, he was near thin), a man of sense, and a very amiable charac^ ; my father was uncommonly pleased with him 3 I thought him the moss agreeable man lid ever seen 3 his visits were frequently repeated, at length he requested my father’s permission to address me, which was granted with plea-,vol. i. B sure
and shame, may impress on your youthful minds this awful and important lesson, that vice is sure to be attended by discovery, shame, contempt,and remorses and that a strict: and uniform practice of virtue, and an ob¬ servance of our several duties, is the only road to universal esteem, heart-felt content, and everlasting happiness hereafter. Unable to repeat the story I promised you, and searful left death should- deprive me of the power to write every particular, I hasten to the pain¬ ful task, which I consider as the last act of my life, and a deserved humiliation.,My father was a Baronet in the weft of England, not less distinguished for his large estate than for his truly respectable character. My mother died in my infancy, leaving only a son of five years old, and myself, juft turned of two. "When arrived at a proper age my brother was sent to Winchester, and myself to a capital school in London. At this school I was taught the usual superficial accomplish¬ ments without any particular attention to my morals.
morals or temper; if I performed my tasks well I was entitled to praise, and was gra¬ tified by being held up as an example for imitation. Thus the feeds of vanity and self consequence were early planted in my mind, and laid the foundation for subsequent errors.,When I arrived at the age of seventeen I left school to live with my father, who had taken a town house for the winter, that I might have some amusement previous to residing in the country. My brother had a commission in the guards, he did not live with my father but visited us daily. One day he brought with him a gentleman of fashion and fortune, a native of Ireland, who was likewise a M j-m in the army : this gentleman’s exterior was r - - ccedingly prepossessing, he was near thim , a man of sense, and a very amiable charatm ; my father was uncommonly pleased with him ; I thought him the moll" agreeable man lid ever seen ; his visits were frequently repeated, at length he requested my father’s permission to address me, which was granted with plea-,vol. i. E fine
sure, and as I could form no objection, but on the contraiy, had a’^cided preference for him ; all matters relative to fortune and fettle - merits were soon agreed on, and in a short time I became a wife.,Never was woman more adored, I was the happiest of my sex, had I known the value of the blessings Providence bestowed upon me in the best apd worthiest of men j but young, vain, and by the flattering world taught to believe highly of my beauty and accom¬ plishments ; although I loved and esteemed my husband I felt myself much gratified by the attentions of those fashionable men, who are always ready to dangle alter married wo¬ men, and too often, by their infiduuus arts, sap the foundation of domestic hap;:inch. — Almost a stranger to the world, I knew but little of the baseness ot mankind, nor the danger of listening to those flatteries which po Non the mind, and by imperceptible de- gi ees lead us on to vice and folly. Mr. Dan- > ers v.ss lively and form ot company, but strictly,5
strictly a man of honor, he discriminated in the choice of his companions, and confined his intimacies to a chosen sew, nevertheless we could not avoid seeing a great deal of company, I received invitations to all the fa¬ shionable parties about town, and too soon grew attached to the amusements held out to ensnare the young and unwary.,For some time I pursued a constant rou¬ tine of pleasure, my husband but seldom ac- companied me, although my brother some¬ times did j I kept very late hours; conse¬ quently was in bed great part of the morning, had no time or inclination to attend to do¬ mestic management, and was extremely mor¬ tified when I found myself in a situation that gave the highest transport to Mr. Danvers and my father. One day, after being cut ’till fix in the morning and scarcely up and dressed against the dinner hour, my husband looked at me some time with great emotion, taking my hand and killing it, my dear Mary, said he tenderly, I am apprehensive you will in-,E 2 jure
jure your health by pursuing pleasure with too much avidity, and keeping such unseason¬ able hours, your charming bloom begins to fade, and the lily supercedes the rose in your cheek; let me entreat you, my love, to con¬ sider yourself and me.,Indeed, Mr. Danvers, I answered peevishly, I must do like others; you would not have me ridiculous enough to break up parties because my huso and chuses I should keep sober hours. He reddened a little and re¬,plied, among parties that are suitable for a. married woman to associate with, the desire os obliging a Im {band would never subject you to ridicule. Yen think then, Sir, I re¬ plied, with. great haughtiness th.it I keep im¬ proper company; however, I am no child to be dictated to, and whilst I know I do no¬ thing wrong, I snail certainly chuse my own friends and return at my own hours. Friends! repeated he ; can you have any friends that are not mine also r No, my dear Mary, we cannot, we will not have divided interests; if,you
you must go abroad to seek for pleasure, far be it from me to controul you, I may and fit all lament the absence of my sweet compa¬ nion, but if fae is not equally gratified by my company, I will make no complaints. You are perfectly right, answered I coldly, for no character is so contemptible as a jealous hus¬ band.” “Jealous, said he, trying to smile, no, my love, of you T am not jealous, ’tis my own indesert that gives me pain, I only fear for your health, and lament my want of abilities to en¬ tertain you sometimes at home.” I made no answer, but from that hour I grew evei y day more indifferent to him, and more attached to dissipation and folly; unaccustomed to con¬ troul, I could not bear the idea of any re¬ monstrances, which I deemed an intuit on my self consequence.,. Once or twice after this my father spoke to me on the impropriety of my conduct, which only made matters worse. I concluded Mr. Danvers had spoken to him, and was therefore equally offended with both3 my hus¬ band, however, neither murmured nor com-,E 3 plained,
plained, he paid several large sums for me, which I loft at play, and was ever making me some little elegant presents to adorn my per¬ son.,The time at length came which obliged me to bear confinement, I was brought to bed of a daughter, (painful remembrance!) Mr. Danvers was transported at my safety, and doated on the infant. From a hint he drop- ed I learned it was his wish I should nurse it myself but this I absolutely determined against, and he did not attempt to contest the point.,I have neither strength nor spirits to relate the continued impropriety of my conduct, I preserved myself indeed from guilt, but every contamination of the mind I yielded to without the least respect to decorum, or my husband’s peace. He attempted, by persua¬ sions and remonstrances, to effect a change in my disposition, all was in vain, and he could not proceed to rigorous measures. Thus, for several years I pursued pleasure from London to Bath, to Scarborough, and all other places where
where company assembled ; my child was en- trusted solely to the care of other?, and to my great joy I was not likely to have an increase of family. About fix years after my marriage an uncle of Mr. Danvers;,r>'?’'s died and left him a considerable estate in Ireland, it was requisite he should go over, he pressed me to accompany him; as I had never been there and understood the court was extremely gay in Dublin, I consented, to his no small joy and surprise. The child went with us, she was a lovely engaging girl, and though shame¬ fully neglected by me, gave promise of an excellent understanding; her father adored her, she was his chief companion and amuse¬ ment.,On our arrival at Dublin we were visited by almost every person of fashion there; I waS introduced at the castle, and quickly found various sources for killing time, and much self gratification in being very generally admired. I grew extremely fond of Ireland, and readily agreed to my husband’s proposition of re-,E 4 maining
maining there for a year or two. The se¬ cond summer after we resided in Dublin, my brother, at my husband’s invitation, came over to see us; a few days subsequent to his arrival, he introduced a school fellow of his, a young man of fashion, who had a place at court. ’Till that moment I had never viewed any man with particular preference though I flirted with all, but this gentleman was, without exception, the handsomest I had ever beheld—O, had his foul been equal to his exterior, what misery and guilt had I escaped! Yet, why blame him, I am what I made my¬ self. To be as brief as possible, for I feel the horrid recollection of past scenes too pow¬ erful for my senses, this gentleman very soon evinced his partiality in my favor; I was flat¬ tered by the discovery though it was cautiously concealed from my husband and brother.,At this time a very eminent limner came to Dublin, Mr. Danvers took my little Mary to him and had her drawn, as well as himself enclosed the miniatures in an elegant gold - cafe
cafe, and presented it to me, at the same time requesting I would sit to the artist. I com¬ plied, more from vanity than any desire to please him, and Accordingly the painter at¬ tended me several times. One day that I had previously taken notice of his work the preceding one, I observed the picture did not look so far advanced as I had believed it to be ; I mentioned my oblervation to the man, and he appeared extremely confused, my cu¬ riosity was then excited, and by dint of per¬ suasion and argument I at last extorted from him the truth—he was employed by Mr. R. to take a copy for him.- This fatal informa¬ tion sunk into my heart, the tenderness and delicacy as I thought of his passion, gave birth to a most violent one in me—the hrst oppor¬ tunity I imprudently mentioned the discovery I had made, and gave him but too much rea¬ son to see I was not displeased with it j this encouragement was sufficient to bring forward an explanation of our mutual partiality, I was weak and wicked enough to pride myself in his affection, and of course soon became a des-,E 5 picable
picable unworthy wretch. Alas! how swift are the gradations of vice when once a wo¬ man permits the barriers of modesty and de¬ licacy to be broken ; when fire gives reason to believe her husband does not po floss her heart, Ilie invites the libertine addresses of worthless men, and soon becomes abandoned and despised.,Our improper correspondence was carried on for some time, I thought, unobserved, yet I began to take great notice of a profound melancholy that daily grew visible in my — no, let me not profane the name of husband, after I became unworthy of being his wife— In Mr. Danvers, then, I perceived an alter¬ ation that surprised me ; from being ever at¬ tentive to my wishes, and always assuming an appearance of cheerfulness, he became silent, melancholy, with more respect than tender¬ ness. towards me. My brother, seemed to catch the infection. One day that we dined alone, a thing that seldom happened, Mr. Danvers was particularly reserved and eat no- thinst;
thing; my brother, with an air of friendship, said, my dear Danvers, what ails you, are you not well; from whence proceeds the unusual gloom that has for some time past pervaded your countenance ? My husband raised his head, and, with a look 1 shall never forget, cried, with great emotion, " My countenance, O, it pervades my heart!" Conscious guilt made me tremble ; my brother threw his eyes strongly upon me, but made no reply.,The moment I could leave the table I flew to my dressing room,, and writing a note to Mr. R. whom I had that evening appointed to meet, told him, something had discon¬ certed me, that I was apprehensive of a dis¬ covery, and begged him to be less frequent in his visits, and more guarded in his looks..,I had scarcely given the servant who was our confidant, this letter, when my brother knocked at the door for admittance; with all. the effrontery I could assume I received a visit, which in reality frightened me. He,E 6 seated.
seated himself, and seemed to be collecting; within the subject he meant to enter upon ; I asked him some trifling question, but my looks did not, I believe correspond with my words, for thus he addressed me. I fear, my dear lifter, I come an unwelcome visitor, but my-mind is much oppreft; Mr. Danvers is very miserable, and you are not happy ; tell me, dear Mary, .what baneful , influence pre¬ vails that causes all this distress ; is Mr. R. the object that de fl roys our happiness ? The tone of his voice and this abrupt question threw me into inconceivable confusion ; for a moment I could not answer, but guilt had hardened my heart, and inspired an insolence, which is its concomitant. I know not, Sir, I replied haughtily, by what right you interrogate me ; if Mr. Danvers leeks for causes to justify his. ill humour ; if you are so attached to him as to give into his opinions, and condemn me for an alteration in his temper, I have nothing; to do with, you mult enquire elsewhere for the influence you mention, and he is the pro- perest person to satisfy you.,He
ELLEN AND J UL I A. 8'■•,‘ '5,He arose, and advancing close to me, Mary, Mary, cried he, in a voice that shook my whole frame, dreadful is the talk to accuse a beloved sister, a wife, a mother, of crimes my soul shudders to mention, but this seeming boldness will not avail you ; know, I have this day discovered the infamous correspondence between you and that inhospitable villain, R. O, Mary, what will your father feel, what must a brother suffer, from his wounded honor, and what misery is the portion of that truly good and worthy man, the father of your child? What must be the feelings of that child here¬ after, when she reflects on her mother’s vices? He could fay no more, his voice faltered and tears ran down his cheeks. Still my stub¬ born heart was unmoved, ,•<Jj'*‘'I raised my voice and attempted to treat his accusations with contempt, and accused Mr. Danvers as ha¬ ving, through a despicable jealousy, given him an unfavorable opinion of me. This ir¬ ritated him. Stop, Madam, said he, dare not accuse your husband, his sorrows are his own ; he has unhappily too much love and respect,for
86,ELLEN AND JULIA.,for an unworthy woman, to throw the least odium on her character, whatever are his suf- ferings: This day accident has discovered to me a shameful intrigue, that has wounded my honor and blighted my happiness; but, mark me. Madam, if you presume to quit this house and meet your paramour again, by every thing that is sacred I will expose you to your father, to your husband, and the world.,With these words he quitted the room, and. left me more dead than alive, yet more in¬ dignant than repentant. Uncertain by what means he became acquainted with my secret, I suspected the servant; the person at whose house we met; in short, I was suspicious of all and afraid to trust any one. Such is the con- fequene of guilt, that no confidence can be placed in its associates, for there are no ties to bind them but interest, and the highest bid¬ der, for that purpose, will obtain the prefer¬ ence.,I passed that evening in my room in a state little short of distraction, Mr. Danvers went out,
out, Mary with him, they returned not for the night, in the morning Sarah Mills, the woman now with me, and who had nursed my child, came into my room with a letter, a man had juft brought, eagerly opening it I found the following contents.,“ I have taken my child from rhe contagion “of bad example, O, Mrs. Danvers, 1 have “ taken her from a mother to whom the ne- “ ver was dear, and to whom lire w ill hence-, “ forth live an entire ftranger, I shall place “ her in safety and return within a few days.,i)1Il351’,“ W. Danvers.”,I had scarcely perused this letter, when my own woman bur ft into my room, O Madam, your brother is brought home dead, killed by Mr. R— in a duel. I heard no more, my senses fled, happy had it been for all related to me had I never had a beingI was re- ftored to life and misery. A Mr. Fitzmau¬ rice, an intimate friend in the family, was in the house, an express was dispatched to my father.
father, but no one knew where to find Mr. Danvers3 a delirious fever seized on me, and for fourteen days I was senseless of every thing that happened, but it pleased heaven to punish me, by restoring me, to know the extent of my guilt, and to die daily with a sense of my crimes.,When the physicians had pronounced me out of danger, Mr. Fitzmaurice came to me 3 I had repeatedly asked those about me for Mr. Danvers, and enquired who was in the house, all information was denied me 3 my murdured brother was continually before my eyes, and although death would have released me from misery, I shuddered at the prospect of dying with so many crimes that sat heavy on my foul. Alas ! I knew not then the full extent of them.,When Mr. Fitzmaurice entered the room he looked at me for a moment with an eye of pity and horror. Tell me, Sir, cried I, tell me all, for I am prepared to hear every thing
thing that is horrible. I feel, answered he, most painfully, the dreadful task that is im ¬ posed upon me, but there is no one else to ■relate the heaviest tidings that tongue can utter. Oh! Mrs. Danvers, you are now alone in the world, you have no father, no husband, no brother! What, asked I wildly, have they all forsaken me ? They have indeed, answer¬ ed he. Well then, said I, in an agony of despair, I have murdered my brother and am reprobated for ever. I am contented. I ne¬ ver could have seen my much injured father, though I must bear his curses. No, said he, you have not those to bear; the account of his son's death, too abruptly delivered, deprived him instantly of life. What he said more I know not, I fainted, my fever returned, and again I was on the verge of death.,Let me hasten to finish this horrid tale —- Strange as it was I recovered. My dear, my respectable father, on receiving the fatal in¬ telligence, was seized with a paralytic stroke, and died without uttering a single word, the sixth
sixth day after my be loved brother fell a vic¬ tim to his sifter’s vices.,Mr. Danvers returned alone, and was in¬ formed of all, he likewise received an account of my father’;,>7'?'s death. No language can de¬ scribe his sufferings, his own words will best speak them ; yet, with a composure that asto- nished every one, he settled all my brother’s and father’s affairs, made his will, secured his Mary’s rights, and fortune; my settlement of five hundred a year remained unimpaired, though my extravagances had greatly injured his fortune, until by the shocking events I have related, Mary became heir to my fa¬ ther’,1Iilt>'‘'s estate. One day after settling all his affairs, and in case of his death placed his child as a ward in chancery, and Mr. and Mrs. Fitzmaurice the guardians of her per¬ son, he discovered to them where she was, exacting from th^m a solemn oath, never to acquaint me with her place of residence, they understood he was going abroad, but, alas ! little expected the manner of his going or his sudden departure j the following morning, before
before the family was up, he quitted his apart¬ ment, leaving two letters, one addressed to me, and another to his friend, on the table. The one to me, which I have never ceased daily to read, and water with my tears, con¬ tained the following lines.,TO MRS. DANVERS.," Ever dear but ill fated Mary, your un¬ happy husband now takes his last adieu for ever, yet think not that Imean to reproach you, or to accuse you as the cause of events dreadful to think of5 no! complaints or reproaches are useless now, and your too susceptible heart must experience in its own feelings sufficient wretchedness to satisfy the most malignant of your accusers : Long, very long, my Kill and ever beloved Mary, I saw I had loft all inte- reft in your heart, yet unconscious of deserv¬ ing so great a misfortune ; I was an attentive observer of your conduct, and sought by my tenderness to revive yours; vain delusive hope! Pleasure entirely engrafted every fa¬ culty of your foul, nor could the endearing ties of wife and mother raise one soft affec¬ tionate sentiment; yet you was not criminal, you
you rclpeffed your honor, on that assurance I still built flattering ideas of returning hap¬ piness. Alas! within these last two months the veil which I could not for son e time pe¬ netrate through was withdrawn, and my misery was complete. My intention was to place my child abroad, and on my return to fettle all my affairs without acquainting you of the particular discovery I had made, and without wounding your reputation or conse¬ quence in the eye of your family or the world. It was my design to pretend business called me to America, and to have left my country for some years, yet to preserve you from re¬ proach, as the mother of my child, I should sometimes have written to you, if you pre¬ served appearances.,Such was my intentions; I did not foreste the unhappy events that followed, that two of the worthiest of mankind should fall vic¬ tims to one of the basest, who is fled to hide his infamy and escape punishment. There was nothing now for me to conceal, no mea¬ sures to observe; the finger of pity, scorn, and,contempt
contempt was pointed at me, it is not to be borne ; I have heard you have been on the verge of the grave, I bend in gratitude to heaven that has restored you, restored you, I hope, to contrition and repentance, to future peace, though happiness can never reach you more. Oh! ray once darling wife, the pride, the boast of my heart in happier days, let not reproach or despair tempt you to rashness or folly ; preserve your life ,1Iilt>'*’‘'till your Creator shall demand it, nor let the first dcviatr n from virtue plunge you into continued vice; resume your reason, consider how much you owe to me, to yourself, and your child; let your future hie make us reparation for all.,Once mme adieu for ever, wherever I go, whatever becomes of me, you will fee, you will know me no more ; I live for my child, for that dear Mary, the sweet resemblance of her ill fated mother, may she never know her sorrows. Let me, for the laid time, speak peace and comfort to you, let me assure you of my pity, my pardon ; believe that with my laid breath I snail never cease topray for you, ami
and that in separating myself from you I feel pangs worse than death. May heaven bless you and forgive as I do ; may you enjoy tran¬ quillity on earth, and everlasting happiness in the world to come—Dearest, most unfortunate of women adieu for ever.,• W. Danvers.”,This foul harrowing letter from the best and most injured of men, was delivered to me by Mr. Fitzmaurice ; the perusal threw me into a hate little short of madness, and when my fury and diff action abated, I funk into a sullen settled despair. Mrs. Fitzmau¬ rice attended me with the molt unremiting kindness 5 to her, and to my faithful Sarah I owe my preservation from the rash effects of despair, for I frequently attempted my life, and raved incessantly on my murdered friends. By their humane attentions I became at length more composed, and con sharing life in my situation as the bitterest punishment, shut out from the woild, without a single claim on society, without daring to consider myself
myself as a mother or wife, ties I had for ever violated ; a paricide, a fratricide, great God ! what a magnitude cf crimes to support! To live under such evils how much superior to the pains of death. Despair made me reso¬ lute and steady, I fixed my plan, and intended alone to seek some desolate corner, where I might drag out the reft of my days, but my kind Sarah would not forsake me ; flic men¬ tioned the neighbourhood of Cumberland as remote, and in many places uninhabited j she had a brother, who lived with a farmer, to him we might apply for a solitary habitation. Her intelligence pleased me, I procured from my frknds the advance of one year’s income, five hundred pounds, a sum I never expected to expend, and resoling all their entreaties to know my future destination, I resigned into their hands the house and furniture, and, with a brea i; g heart one night, that no eye might observe me, left Dublin forever. The weak ftate of my body and mind precluded me from taking long journies, and it was near three weeks before I arrived in Cumberland, exhausted
exhausted, fatigued, and almost overwhelmed with sorrow.,Sarah’s brother lived at a village between Penrith and Kendal, in"-¬_'*‘’'Weftmoreland, at his filter’''s request he searched all round the out¬ skirts of the two Counties, he told us of se¬ veral wonderful caves near the lakes, which, by tradition, were once inhabited, but which no¬ body now ventured to explore; he mentioned also an old abbey, which, with its antique fur¬ niture, was falling into decay, almost in ruins, and uninhabited, because it was generally be¬ lieved to be haunted by evil spirits. This habitation appeared to me the most desirable in the world, Sarah indeed had her fears, but I tried to overcome them, and Hie grew ashamed to express them openly ; in short, I came to the ruinous abbey, there were yet two or three habitable apartment:, with some old furniture; by the help of Peter we got in some necessaries, and he contrived to send us provisions weekly.,In
In this place I resided near eight months, when one morning taking a walk round the under colonade, or rather cloy Iters, I ob¬ served in one corner a small door, that had never before attracted my notice, this door I tried to open, and with some difficulty effected, a number of (tone steps were visible, altho’ the descent was quite dark. I went up to my apartment, called Sarah to attend me with a light, and returned to the door, descended the steps in spight of her fears and admoni¬ tions, and at length, after several winding paths, came to these apartments, which cer¬ tainly retained traces of being once inhabited. The situation, the solemn gloom that per¬ vaded through them, suited the state of my mind, I instantly resolved to make this my habitation. With great difficulty I persuaded Sarah to accord with my views,but finding me resolute, (he would not forsake me: We soon removed our furniture into this cave, Peter (till was our friend, and preserved our secret j I made it worth his while to be faithful.,VOL. I. F Here
Here for nine years I have dragged on a miserable existence, and ’tis almost incredible to believe any constitution could so long sup¬ port such agonies as I have hourly experi¬ enced ; my time has been spent in sorrow and repentance, nor for once interrupted but by the death of Peter, seven months ago, which was an irreparable loss to us, as, in conse¬ quence of it, Sarah was obliged to go twice a week to a neighbouring village to pro¬ cure us necessaries, and being a great distance was more fatigue than sue could well support; but I trust now the faithful creature’s labours will Ikon be over, the lamp of life will soon be extinguished, the feeble light glimmers weakly, and will very shortly be no more.,Thus, my dear young ladies, I have related my story, let it fink deep into your hearts; behold the effects of vanity, folly, and vice ; be assured virtue only can entitle you to the esteem of die world, and procure to your own minds that peace and satisfaction, without which the must splendid situations, the highest gratifications of your vainest wishes must ever fail
fail of producing—for vice, sooner or later, brings disgrace, contempt, and sorrow.,A few lines more I wish, to add; Last week, sensible that my dissolution was near at hand, I wrote to Mr. Fitzmaurice, likewise to the agent of Mr. Danvers, one or the other, I hope both, are shill alive, and as there are large sums in their hands belonging to me, I have requested my kind and faithful Sarah may be allowed twenty pounds yearly, to live where fire likes, which, with the little that I leave in this place behind me, will be suffi¬ cient for her when I am no more ; the clergy¬ man to whom I have directed her to apply will give them the necessary information.,If Mr. Danvers, if my child, still live, may that gracious Being who has vouchsafed to spare and bring me to a due sense of my crimes, and I humbly hope will accept of my penitence ; may he ever bless and preserve them from all the evils of this life, and may we one day meet in a glorious eternity, where,F 2 all
loo ELLEN AND JULIA.,all fins are forgiven, all resentments subside, and where the truly penitent may hope for mercy. The pen drops from my trembling hand, all will soon be over, lovely and good young creatures persevere in truth and virtue and you will be happy.,Mary Danvers.,CHAP. VIII.,MRS. WOODVILLE and her young auditors, were extremely affected by this melancholy letter, which made an im¬ pression on Julia that was never erased from her memory — she exceedingly lamented that her father’s commands precluded her from assisting poor Sarah, and impatiently waited
waited for the time she expected to fee her. Near a week had passed in anxiety on her part, deep melancholy that hourly increased in Mr. Woodville, and curiosity in Ellen, when one morning Anthony announced Sarah Mills 3 she was received with the most con¬ descending kindness : The poor woman burst into tears when Julia addressed her, and was some time before she could recover sufficient composure to relate the following particulars.,“When the gentleman took you away, ladies, I left every thing as decent as I could, and went away to enquire out for the parson’s house 3 dear me, I had a world of trouble to find it out,"for he lives above four miles be¬ yond the abbey 3 and lb when I came and gave him the paper, you may think how the gentleman was surprised, he asked me a heap of questions, and so I was forced to tell every thing of our coming from Ireland, and all the reft about my poor mistress’,Zz>'?'s death, and the good dear gentleman though he is young and handsome could not help crying : So he,F 3 ordered
ordered me something to eat, and then we walked to the Abbey; but when he came and saw the rooms, and the dear lady lying dead, lord how he grieved ! He made me fit down and looked over every thing, and put it all down in paper, and there was more than sixty pounds in money, and he told me every thing was mine. God bless her dear soul, I did not want to be so rich, she was but too good to me ; so then he went home and lent a woman and a man, and had the body wrap- .ped up and carried to his house, and I went too, and next all the things were taken there and he gave me a paper about them, and a re¬ ceipt, he said, and two days ago my dear good lady was buried; and so he asked me where I would live, and what I would do. I am sure I don’t know, I have loft my poor Peter, I know nobody here, and, God help me, I am too old to travel far, so I told the gentleman I would ftay a week with him if he pleased. As long as you like my good woman, said he, though, poor soul, he has but a poor house and isn’t very rich, I believe, but I’ll be bound for it he’s very good.,And
And so. Madam, added she, addressing her¬ self to Julia, I longed to see you, and beg your advice, what I can do with myself now I be so rich, and a poor lone woman whom nobody knows.”,Here Sarah stopped, and Julia looking on her mother with supplicating eyes, O, cried Ihe, that we could but offer her an asylum. I wish it was possible, said Mrs. Woodville, but I fear your father will never approve of it. Ellen was about to speak, when Mr. Woodville entered the room, and Sarah’s ac¬ count was repeated to him by her, at the con¬ clusion of which she added, my dear Sir, will you permit my mother to have this faithful creature here ? Flow dare you request it, said he, sternly, I wish to see neither men nor women here, I have already too many, let her go back to the parson, he may keep her, or send her home; I was wrong in gratifying your curiosity to let, her call, but beware, wo¬ man, how you presume to mention my family to any one, and then darting an angry look at them all he left the room.,F4,Sarah
j 04,ELLEN AND JULIA.,Sarah burst into tears, O what a cross gen¬ tleman, cried she, how unlike the sweet dear handsome parson ; but, dear ladies, what shall Ido? Indeed, answered Mrs. Woodville, my good woman, if the clergyman is so kind, you had best stay with him until letters have been sent os your mistress’s death to her friends. Ah! madam, said lire, but how can that be, I have forgot the name of the gen¬ tleman my lady’,1Iilt<'*‘'wrote to some time ago, or I would have told the parson. Julia instantly gave her, on a slip of paper, the name of Fitz¬ maurice, Dublin, and requested she would call again a week hence, as they dared not see her too often. The poor woman with tears and a thousand bleflings took her leave, tho’ with a great hatred to Mr. Woodville.,That gentleman daily estranged himself from his family more and more, he frequently was absent from morning ’till night, eat very little, and spoke left. One morning at break¬ fast he mentioned Mrs. Danvers, for the first time, of his own accord. There is. little else but
but viliany in the world now, exclaimed he, what an ungrateful vicious woman she was, how it was possible any man could support such treatment I know not; for my part, I am weary of an existence where one experiences only deceit, fraud, and injustice; in escaping from such a world she is happier than she de¬ served to be. The severity of her punish¬ ment here, and her sincere repentance, replied his wife, will, I hope, atone for her crimes and entitle her to mercy. So then, said he, repentance is, in your opinion, a sufficient ex¬ piation for whatever wickedness people may commit; a . good convenient creed for your girls to lay hold of, without doubt. Pardon me, my dear Mr. Woodville, answered she,, you misconceive my meaning; the poor wo¬ man we are speaking of had no mother to direct or subdue her juvenile propensities ;, her education was wrong,, and she was mar¬ ried too early in life to be capable of fixing her affections, as judgment might direct, in consequence of which from not estimating the worth of her husband as he deserved, his,F 5 very
very virtues were obnoxious to her: Her mis¬ taken conduct, her crimes, and the dreadful subsequent events, afford a striking lesson to the young and thoughtless mind, of more efficacy perhaps than years of admonition could do. May it prove so, said he, with a deep sigh, but those are happiest, who, cut off in early life, avoid such connexions as plunge them into misery, and escape the horrors a parent feels for his rising offspring. He arose and hastily left the room, whilst the mother and daughters gazed at each other, surprised at his unusual familiarity, and that he had, of himself, mentioned Mrs. Danvers,whose name and misfortunes he had studiously avoided taking notice of.,Ellen, who sometimes attended her father in his walks, had, since the discovery at the rocks, been entirely shook off, (lie more than once repented letting him into the secret, but she was so provoked and envious left her sifter should visit the lady without her, that she made no scruple of violating her promise and confessed,5
confessed every thing that happened the pre¬ ceding day, with a view, in which she suc¬ ceeded, that her father might accompany her into the rock, and preclude her sister from any advantages she might derive by being with the recluse alone. This adventure had a particular effect on Mr. Woodville’s spirits, Always grave and austere, the severity of his temper grew almost insupportable, and the sufferings of his wife were beyond all power of description.,A few days after the preceding conver¬ sation he did mot attend the breakfast table as usual, after waiting some time she sent to him, he returned for answer, he should take none, was extremely busy, and desired he might not be interrupted again. This answer surprised and alarmed her, and as the day advanced the dinner hour past and he did not make his ap¬ pearance, she grew so very uneasy that in spite of his prohibition she ventured to the apart¬ ment, and knocked softly at the door; he de¬ manded, in angry voice, who was there ? She,F 6 spoke.
spoke, and expressed her fears for his health from want of refreshment. In a mild voice he requested her to go down and he would join her at supper. With a light heart Hie returned to the girls, and at night he came into the room with an air more mild and cheerful than he had worn for many years, and behaved to all with kindness very unusual; his family were delighted at a change they could not account for, and they spent an agree¬ able evening, though Mr. Woodville eat very sparingly and diank only water.,The"'-¬■‘’*' following morning he came down, took a cup of tea, and retired again to his study, instead of walking, which was his con¬ stant custom, in all weathers, until the preced¬ ing day. Mrs. Woodville and her daugh¬ ters were fitting at work, commenting on the alteration in their father, when they were alarmed with the found of a gun going oft in the-house, flie with a fad presentiment jumped from her chair, flew up flairs, followed by "her children^ she tried the study door, it open¬ ed—what.a dreadful fight presented itself to a.,wife b
wife I Mr. Woodville lay on the floor wel¬ tering in blood, a gun by his fide, which he had doubtless fixed against the wainscot and contrived to draw the trigger in such a man¬ ner that the muzzle of the gun was to his mouth, and blew the upper part of the head off, his brains scattered on the floor. Mrs. Woodville shrieked and fell senseless to the ground 3 the screams of the girls brought up the servants who were all too much frightened to be of any service: Julia was on her knees trying to raise her mother; Ellen was funk into a chair staring wildly about her. One of the women run to the garden in search of Anthony and Thomas, and met the former coming to the house with Sarah Mills ; the girl in a few words told the dreadful tale and all hastened to the apartment where this tragical act had been perpetrated. Not a single word passed, Anthony advanced to the body and saw it had been instantaneous death, he there¬ fore assisted to raise the unhappy lady, who began to shew signs of returning life, and con¬ veyed her to another room; the poor trem¬ bling children followed in agitations not to be,Expressed-
expressed. Ellen’s tears flowed abundantly and loudly; Julia was the image of terror, griefj and mute astonishment, not one tear could ease the " o’ercharged heart,” or relieve the oppression that scarcely permitted her to breathe.,Mrs. Woodville after several heavy groans opened her eyes, she saw her daughters, look¬ ing steadily at them, she raised her eyes to heaven, but could not speak. Old Sarah, who in her long attendance upon her unfortunate mistress had been accustomed to such scenes, procured drops and other things necessary, which she got the ladies to take, and after some time nature reassumed its functions, their senses were returned, and floods of tears gave ease to the distress which language had no power to express. Sarah persuaded Mrs. Woodville to lay down, Ellen offered to fit by her, whilst Julia withdrew into another apartment, with Sarah and their faithful Jane, who had lived with them from the birth of Ellen.,Alas!
Alas! cried Julia, what is to be done, how mutt we a61, who can we apply to on this me¬ lancholy, this dreadful Business ? O, my dear lady, answered Sarah, let me go and fetch the blessed Mr. Evelyn, our parson, he will advise' and comfort you all. My good woman, said Julia, you are right, to him we can with propriety apply, and without con¬ sulting my mother I will venture to fend An¬ thony with you, on horseback, diredtly ; lose no time added she mournfully, for I am under a thousand apprehensions about my dear mo¬ ther, and I struggle hard to subdue my own feelings under a situation so full of horror.,Anthony and Sarah were soon on their way, whilst Julia returned to her afflicted pa¬ rent-mutual tears and embraces spoke what they could not utter, Mrs. Woodville was in the utmost agitation, and extremely feverish. After a long and expressive silence Julia said, pardon me, Madam, if I have done wrong, but, without a friend to direst us, I have taken the liberty to send Sarah for the good par¬ son.
son, Mr. Evelyn, I hope I have not done wrong ? No, my love, ’tis our only resource, was all Mrs. Woodville could reply; the dreadful scene was constantly before her eyes: Her husband dead! guilty of suicide ! a victim to a discontent and misanthropy improperly nourished, and which at length subdued all sense of religion and reason 1 The idea was too shocking, her head grew giddy, the fever increased, and by the time Mr. Evelyn ar¬ rived she was in a very alarming state, and poor Julia almost distracted with her sears; Ellen exhausted by her tears had retired to bed, and when Sarah announced her dear parson, as she called him, was in the parlour. Julia had scarcely life and spirits sufficient to support so painful an interview with an entire stranger, especially a gentleman, her father being the only man she had seen,, except the servants, since childhood..,With trembling steps and a beating heart she ordered his admittance into the next apartments she endeavoured to collect all her fortitude
fortitude and resolution as she entered the room, but was struck with inconceivable sur¬ prise and confusion when one of the most elegant men in the world, and to her at that moment appearing as an angel of peace, ad¬ vanced to the door, and bowing on her hand led her to a chair, neither being able to speak for several minutes — at length Mr. Evelyn broke filence.,“ I feel myself particularly happy, Madam, in being honored with your commands to at¬ tend at Woodland Caftle, any thing and every thing you can desire from one devoted to serve you, it will be my study to obey you in.” “ My situation, Sir, replied Julia, with eyes overflowing, the distressful situation of my mother calls for the attention of a friend; in this country we have none, unknowing and unknown here we are as flrangers : the dreadful event which has taken place this day precludes ceremony, your humanity in a recent instance within my knowledge in- Ipired me with confidence to claim the be¬ nefit;
ne fit of your advice and assistance, and as the first proof, I beg your recommendation of a medical gentleman for my poor mother.” Here a burst of tears prevented her from going on.,He arose with great emotion — Will you permit me, Madam, to fee the dear lady, I have some knowledge in physic, and shall be enabled to judge if such assistance is abso¬ lutely necessary. Without attempting a re¬ ply Julia conducted him to her mother’s apartment, and advanced to the side of the bed, for the purpose of introducing him, but alas ! Mrs. Woodville had received a shock her reason was unable to sustain, sire knew no one, and raved incessantly on her wretched husband. Mr. Evelyn feeing the state she was in, almost by force drew Julia into the outer room, and ordered Anthony to go di¬ rectly express for Dr. Symonds, who lived upwards of ten miles from Woodland Castle.,Ellen, who could not rest, by this time joined them, and was introduced as Miss,Woodville.
Woodville. That same moment gave birth to different sentiments between her and the young clergyman, he viewed her as a very beautiful girl, but the traces of pride, haughty consciousness of her charms, and an assumed superiority over her sifter, entirely destroyed the effect: of her beauty in his eyes ; and tho',*>»1Iil' he admired, it was the admiration he would have bestowed on a picture, without giving birth to one tender sentiment. Not so was Ellen affected; wonder and surprise were her first emotions ; the next was admiration and a defire of pleasing, yet, feeling the melan¬ choly circumstances under which he was in¬ troduced, she was for that night incapable of exerting herself to attract his attention.,Mr. Evelyn with one of the best hearts in the world, felt himself particularly interested for these lovely sisters, who, at their time of life, were novices in the great school of life, and, circumstanced as they were, demanded the tenderest friendship and assiduity that a generous and humane mind could bestow. Sarah had related every thing that had fallen within
within her knowledge of the family, but all was so trifling and imperfect he could form no judgment of their character, fortune, or the causes which had instigated Mr. Wood¬ ville to put a period to his existence — He had frequently heard a strange account of the master of Woodland Castle, who lived en¬ tirely secluded from society, and although he had resided near five years in the neighbour¬ hood never once had seen him; he concluded either uncommon misfortunes, depressed cir¬ cumstances, or the contempt of mankind, from improper conduct, had driven him to a situation so remote and solitary, and that choice could have no share in his induce¬ ments to six himself and family there.,Under this conviction he had attended at the Castle, and was struck with the highest wonder and admiration when Julia entered the room. Humanity, which had been his first motive, was entirely absorbed in his eager desire to serve her, every faculty of his foul was alive to alleviate her affliction, and speak,peace3
peace to her mind. He waited with anxious impatience for the arrival of Doctor Sy¬ monds, and felt little less agitation than the unhappy daughters, for his opinion of Mrs. Woodville’s cafe. When the Doctor came he attended him to her room, and was Re¬ lighted to find his judgment was rather fa¬ vorable, and that he supposed, if possible to procure some hours reft, the fever which had seized her brain might be reduced 5 she was let blood, and the Doctor hastened home to send her proper medicines.,After his departure Mr. Evelyn requested permission to stay the night and watch by her, and leave to send Thomas to the parson¬ age, that should his presence be required there, he might be immediately sent for. This being granted, with a warm acknowledg- - ment of his kindness, Anthony was ordered to set off early in the morning for Kendal, the nearest town, and there procure all things necessary for the funeral and subsequent de¬ mands. He, entreated the ladies to retire,and
and rest themselves, but no persuasions could induce them to give up their attendance on their mother, they therefore pasted the night •in the melancholy employment of watching the progress of her disorder, and returning reason.,Between two and three o’clock she dr opt asleep and remained quite composed ’till after eight, when she awoke perfectly in her senses, but so extremely weak and low, that it was with difficulty she articulated a single word. Having taken some cordials which the physician had sent, and the opiate again operating in a doze, Mr. Evelyn per¬ suaded the young ladies to withdraw into the next apartment, he then produced a letter which Thomas had found upon his late ma¬ ster’s table and given to him, it was address¬ ed to Mrs. Woodville. The poor girls burst into a flood of tears, on viewing the hand.,It is grievous to me, slid Mr. Evelyn, to be compelled thus to wound your sensibility, but
but ’tis possible ri'~-¬■•’':ere may be some direc¬ tions in this letter necessary to be observed, how then are we to act? Mrs. Woodville is by no means in a situation to see the letter or be consulted. O, no, cried Julia, I would not for worlds speak to her on the subject; painful as it must be to us, I think we shall be justified in opening the letter, yet I submit to your judgment, my dear Ellen, and shall be guided by your opinion. Then, answer¬ ed Ellen, who held the letter, I shall open it, I think the necessity will excuse the liberty. She broke the seal and requested the clergy¬ man to read it—With a trembling hand and faltering voice he obeyed her.,CHAP.
CHAP. IX.,To Mrs. Woodville.,TJEFORE this reaches your hands, my ■E* ever beloved and estimable wife, I shall be at reft, delivered from an existence I have draged on most painfully to myself and fa¬ mily for some years. Grieve not, dear Ellen, at an event, dreadful perhaps in itself, to your feelings, but which releases me from misery j pray for me, that my impatient spirit may suffer here only, and that the crime I am about to commit may be forgiven. I feel that I am a coward, that I desert my post, and plunge into a greater evil to avoid letter ones, inflicted on me from my own folly, imprudence, and a censurable discontent at dispensations.
EUJ-¬"'’~_*'lN AND JULIA. 12t,dispensations, you, with all your gentleness of temper, have had fortitude to bear. I hate the world, I detest society, I render my own family unhappy; I have experienced the de- lufion of what? is falsely called pleasure, the deceit of mankind, the insincerity of friends ; yet poor Danvers proved the unfaithfulness of a wife! Let me here do justice to your virtues, let me acknowledge, with shame to myfelfj you have been an angel, and to de¬ liver you from a continued hopeless slate of misery, is .one motive, among many, that in¬ duces me to commit a rash action reason must condemn. Danvers lived for his child, I can be of no service to my children, I be¬ queath them to the care of a good, virtuous, and affectionate mother—keep them from the great world, from temptations to vice, but immure, them no longer in this desolate place; let them obey your precepts, follow your example, and they will be happy—watch over Ellen, she has too much my haughty and impatient spirit, with a strong understand¬ ing, which, if not well directed, may lead her,vol. i. G into
into error. Julia is like yourself, much good sense, gentle, amiable, and unassuming, with a benevolent heart, and a fortitude that will enable her to bear the evils of life with more courage than perhaps the stronger mind of her sifter would endure. May the Almighty bless and preserve you all. Apply to the worthy clergyman who is the protector of Sarah Mills, his name I know is Evelyn, his cha¬ racter is good, ,he will assist you. Adieu, my dear wife and children, at this moment I feel my tenderness, which has long been frozen up, revive stronger than ever. My spirit revolts at the action I have premedi¬ tated, my foul shrinks at the idea of what may follow—a few moments may unnerve my hand—I can no more—Heaven preserve and bless you here and hereafter.,H. Woodville.,No words can describe the distress which this letter occasioned. When Mr. Evelyn came to the part which mentioned Ellen he flopped, but having begun the sentence, tho’ almost
almost drowned in tears, she hastily cried, read on, Sir, I insist upon your going on ; why " watch over Ellen ?" With great re¬ luctance he proceeded., and by a glance saw indignation had stopped her tears ; but when he drew the character of Julia, a talk he per¬ formed with great feeling and emphasis, Ellen rudely interrupted him, " My father might have spared this discrimination of character, he was no stranger to my mother’s partiality for her favorite, and-" " O lifter, cried Julia, taking her hand, do not indulge such a dangerous mistake, our mother has no par¬ tialities, she loves us both equally. Ellen coldly repulsed her hand, and entreating par¬ don of Mr. Evelyn, requested he would finish the letter, which he had scarcely concluded before Julia fell senseless from her chair. Whilst the clergyman flew to her aflistance, her sifter rose and rung the bell, there, said she, in a reproachful tone, there is a proof of my father's judgment, and her wonderful for¬ titude. This spiteful remark did not go un¬ noticed by Mr. Evelyn, though he let it pass,G 2 unanswered 5
unanswered ; the entrance of a servant, who assisted him, recovered Julia from the shock she had received by the conclusion of the letter. Ellen mean time was perusing a pa¬ per which had dropped, unheeded by Mr. Evelyn, as he turned the sheet. Seeing her sister tolerably recovered she turned-to her with an air of indifference, this paper men¬ tions that we have fix thousand pounds each, and something more at my mother’s death, who has eight hundred a years lord, who could have thought my father was so rich ? The afflicted Julia could make no reply, she was meditating on those lines of Mason,,< c Think what a sea of deep perdition *Ss' 'whelms," The wretch*t1Iil<'’ 's trembling foul, who launches forth," Uaaccns',1IilSsn’'d to eternity.”,O, my father, my dear father, cried she, clasping her hands, heaven, heaven have met y! She covered her face with her hand¬ kerchief, in an agony that drew tears from the worthy clergyman, and even softened the heart of Ellen, who, with a tender voice re¬ quested,5
quested her to be more composed, or stie might disturb her mother in the adjoining apartment. This considerate remark ope¬ rated more than any consolation could have done, she pressed her lister’s hand in an em¬ phatic silence, and hastily returned to her mother’s apartment, leaving Ellen with Mr. Evelyn, who appeared buried in reflection.,What, Sir, said she, are we to do with this letter, as there are no orders, or directions of any kind, ’tis not necessary my mother should know its contents for some time at least. I am of your opinion, Madam, he replied, ’tis possible Mr. Woodville may have made a will, you may have guardians appointed, yet I can by no means think we are authorised to search for any papers until your good mo¬ ther is capable of giving orders, all we can do for the present is to have a lead coffin, and then we may wait for the desirable re¬ turn of Mrs. Woodville’s health, which I hope is not far distant. Ellen acquiesced with great readiness to his sentiments, and by,G 3 her
126 ELLEN AND JULIA.,her attentive politeness appeared desirous of effacing any impressions he might entertain to her prejudice from her father'°'s letter. They followed Julia and were delighted to find her mother perfectly in her fenses, and capable of taking notice though Hie could not speak to them.,Mr. Evelyn rejoiced at an alteration which gave the mold sensible pleasure to her chil¬ dren, and seized the opportunity to visit his parsonage. The following day being Sunday, he knew it was not in his power to devote much time to this afflicted family, for he at¬ tended two churches at sixteen miles distance, through miserable dreary roads.,Mr. Evelyn’s father was the second son of a Baronet, he was brought up to the church, and after taking orders his father purchased a living of nearly three hundred pounds a year for him, and he had some expectations of a child’s share, not very inconsiderable, at his father’s death, Sir Robert Evelyn having,only
only two sons and a daughter; but unhappily Mr. Charles Evelyn, soon after he had pos- seffion of his living, was imprudently guilty of an unpardonable crime in marrying an amiable young woman, the daughter of an apothecary, without a shilling fortune—this Hep so exasperated the Baronet that at his death he bequeathed him only the trifling sum of one hundred pounds to buy mourn¬ ing. His lifter married a gentleman of fa¬ mily and fortune, in Scotland, his brother, then Sir Robert, imbibed the prejudices of his father, and seemed to forget he had a brother existing. Mr. Charles Evelyn how¬ ever felt no regret for the loss of riches or friends, he was much grieved at the resent¬ ment of his father, and was most painfully affected, that resentment should be carried to the grave, which he had reason to think was chiefly owing to the ill offices of his brother, as Mrs. Evelyn’s merits were such as pro¬ cured her universal esteem and respect.,They had but one child, and their whole attention was devote! to the care of his edu-,G 4 cation,
12$,ELLEN AND JUI.U.,cation, in which they had abundant reason to pride themselves in their success. When of an age to go to college his father sent him there with an establishment that compelled him to give up many comforts for himself and wife, to support — but he well knew a young man of genius and spirit, placed at a university without the means of supporting himself genteelly, would feel a degradation, an unmerited neglect, which must wound his feelings, and prevent that attention to study, that satisfaction which may allowably attend conscious merit, when upon an equality with others.,Young Mr. Evelyn, sensible of his father's kindness, studied to deserve it by an unre- miting industry in the progress of his studies, and was universally esteemed and respected by every one who knew how to value supe¬ rior merit. His father had been promised a living for him by a gentleman of rank in his neighbourhood, and on whose promises he thought he could rely, the living he himself possessed was already fold in reversion by the patron
patron to whom it belonged, as unhappily Mr. Evelyn had no money to secure it in his own poffeffion.,A short time before young Evelyn was to leave College his mother had taken a young girl, about seventeen, under her protection, until she could procure an eligible situation for her; she was the daughter of an indus¬ trious couple, who kept a small shop, but who dying within a short time of each other, left their child with a very few pounds only when their affairs were settled. This young girl was handsome and amiable, she wished to go abroad to wait on some lady, but had few requisite qualifications for that station, Mrs. Evelyn, with a humanity that did her honor, received her into her house, instructed her in several things necessary, and earnestly sought among her acquaintance for a situation- that might be comfortable to her.,At this time the noble friend of the elder Mr. Evelyn caine frequently to the house,,O £ the*
the person of Kitty attracted him, and, like most other fine gentlemen, he thought an un¬ protected girl of humble birth was fair game, and would be honored by his notice. Under this presumption he seized every opportunity of explaining his admiration, and great de- figns in her favor. The girl, who was really good and virtuous, repulsed and avoided him; but a man like him was not easily discou¬ raged, he persevered in watching and teazing her continually with his passion, and one day accidentally meeting her in a meadow which lay between the parsonage and village, he joined her, and grew so very importunate, that the girl answered him with more spirit than prudence in her situation, which so en¬ raged him that he laid hold of her very rude¬ ly, and began to take several impertinent free¬ doms ; site, much terrified, screamed very loudly, and luckily brought two young fel¬ lows to her assistance from an adjoining field; on their approach my Lord quitted her, vow¬ ing revenge. Terror and fright rendered her almost dead, they knew her, and conveyed,her
her safe to the parsonage, telling Mrs. Evelyn what had happened; (he was extremely shock¬ ed at the intelligence, and in a moment an¬ ticipated the unhappy consequences, Kitty was obliged to be taken to her bed. Mr. Evelyn was excessively enraged, and his wife grieved for the insulted girl, and the effects it might produce to the family interest. The following day they were informed Lord A— had left the country, Mr. Evelyn was not sorry to be spared the unpleasant task of ex¬ postulation on the subject, and in a short time after, the girl was, by their recommendation, received into the house of a lady several miles distant, where she lived very happily..,Young Charles was now returned from college with every degree of distinction the heads of the university could bestow.. When, he had taken orders he officiated as his fa¬ ther’s curate, but, alas! that pleasure was of short duration.. The elder Mr. Evelyn was seized with an inflammation on his lungs, in consequence of a cold, and died in a very few - months after his son’s return home..,6 6 This,
This loss was most severely felt by the mother and son, and their affliction could ad¬ mit of no other alleviation■-¬,'‘’ 'than what the re¬ flection on his virtues afforded — they knew he was good, and therefore must be happy. What a consolation to the sorrowing heart for the loss of friends 1,When their gvief was a little abated by time and reason, they were compelled to look round for future residence and support. Mr. Evelyn proposed an application to Lord A. for the performance of his promise to pro¬ cure him a living; his mother would not dis¬ courage him although she had little hopes of his success, and therefore was not disappointed, though grieved on her son’s account, when he received an answer with " Lord A’s com¬ pliments to Mr. Evelyn, condoled with him and his. good mother on their loss, and felt great concern that he could not at present serve Mr. Evelyn, as the only living he had any prospect of procuring fur. him had been previously disposed, os.”,Such
Such is the language of most great men 1 Miserable is the being who leeks court de¬ pendance, and rests his hopes on the patron¬ age of the great, vexation and disappoint¬ ment attends him, and that time, which by talents and industry might have been other¬ wise profitably employed, is waited in a use¬ less attendance, idle habits contrasted, the temper soured, and the unhappy dependant too generally lose to the world, his family, and friends.,Young Evelyn, new to the world, “un¬ hackneyed in the ways of men,” of strict in¬ tegrity, and a stranger to duplicity, took Lord A—’s answer in a literal sense, and when he lamented his own disappointment, told his mother he was sure his Lordship must be much vexed on being obliged to fend such unpleasant intelligence. Alas 1 my dear Charles, said she, you are but little acquainted with great men, and the facility with which they make and forget promises, as it serves their present purposes. Lord. -A— is con¬,scious
scious of Improper behaviour, and as " they never forgive who have done the wrong,” he is glad to shake us off without any explana¬ tions ; but, added she, observing his painful emotions, take courage, my dear son, we have one great, good, and beneficent patron, who will never desert us ; on him we will rely, and doubt not of his protection, if we deserve it.,Evelyn fighed, unable to speak from the variety of ideas that crowded upon his mind, he saw himself and a beloved parent thrown on an unfeeling world, two or three hundred pounds the utmost they could raise, without, friends, (though they had relations)'■•‘’'and now without the patronage he had ever been taught to look forward to as his best hope in: life. However, to fink under his disappoints ments was unworthy a rational being, he therefore loft no time in settling his affairs,, every thing was disposed of, and, beyond his expectations, he realised near fiveXx' 'hundred, pounds, this sum, unknowing to his mother, .,he
he immediately sunk for an annuity for her, of five and forty pounds, -and then wrote to Oxford, to the heads of the college he had belonged, requesting their recommendation of him to a country curacy. No false pride debased the mind of young Evelyn, he was superior to that mistaken haughtiness of foul which could not bear to appear in a less ele¬ vated situation than he had been accustomed to move in; he saw the necefiity of providing for his future support, and considered it as no degradation of merit that he was poor if he could procure a small independance. His mother felt the full force of his duty and af- fection for her, and very reluctantly complied, with his earnest supplication, that sire would board in some decent family, and live as com¬ fortably as her small income would allow —- accordingly she was fettled with a worthy tradesman at five and twenty pounds for her board including every expence but washing, and as she had a good stock of linen and cioaths, flic would not, for some time at least, have occasion to exceed her income, to which nevertheless
nevertheless her son flattered himself he should find means to make an addition.,In a short time he received an answer from Oxford, and a recommendation to two cura¬ cies, if he would accept them, in the County of Westmoreland, they were sixteen miles distant fiom each other, the duty to be di¬ vided alternately , mornings and evenings ; one of them was twenty-fourpoundsyearly, the other twenty. Though neither the terms nor situation was very flattering to a young man, not yet five and twenty, yet he hesitated, not a moment in signifying his acceptance of the ofler — his mother entreated him to let her accompany him, but this he would not hear of at least until he had settled in the. parsonage, and seen what accommodations he could give. He soon received the appoint¬ ment, and taking a very tender leave of his mother, who felt little less at this separation, from her worthy son than at the death of her husband, and found all the fortitude she pos- fefsed scarcely sufficient to support her under this second painful stroke. Poor Evelyn was deeply
deeply affedted, but recommending her to the care of Providence, he tore himself from her and pursued his dreary journey.,On his arrival at the place he was to inha¬ bit, and which was called the parsonage, he found a cottage of two ground rooms, two bed chambers over, a back kitchen with a room over that, a tolerable garden, and a ho¬ vel fora horse 3 the whole much out of repair and the furniture very indifferent. The rec¬ tor, who resided at Newcastle, came there twice a year for a few days, and then the best, and indeed the only decent apartment was his. The house was situated on the skirts of a dreary common, and was three miles from the first church, and sixteen from the other — he contrived to fettle with the parishioners, that the morning duty should be at the greatest distance, by which means he returned to din¬ ner, and did the evening service with less in¬ convenience to himself.,In this spot, and without any amusement but what his books, the cultivation of his gar¬ den.
den, and sometimes a fevz charitable visits to the sick and infirm in the neighbourhood, af¬ forded him, he had vegetated, for it could scarcely be called an existence, near five years, when old Sarah attended him by the order of her departed mistress—the circumstances at¬ tending her visit gave him an infinite deal of surprise ; the stories he had heard relative to the many wonderful caves, some of them for¬ merly inhabited, he had looked upon as fabu¬ lous tales, which the ignorance and supersti¬ tion of the country people encouraged; it ap¬ peared almost impossible any human being, much less a delicate woman, could exist in a situation so forlorn and terrifying.,Sarah in telling her story, before she was sensible of the lapse, said, how greatly the charming young lady was shocked at the death of her mistress. W hat young lady, demanded he. She directly was sensible of her error, and answered, O dear, Sir, "don’t ask me, I forgot myself to be sure, but I have sworn not to tell a word, so pray don’t a sic me. How¬ ever his curiosity might be excited, he too much
much respected a vow of any kind to prefs her to a further discovery, and therefore took no notice of her absence, the days she called at Woodland, until the dreadful event of Mr. Woodville’s death required his presence there. The melancholy circumstances under which he found the family, the appearance of two such lovely girls, secluded from society, and without a friend to afford them any consola¬ tion, was a situation that greatly interested his feelings, and he felt a painful regret in being compelled to absent himself from them the following day.,Whilst Mr. Evelyn, as before mentioned, took the opportunity to visit his parsonage, Mrs. Woodville gradually grew better, the fever abated, she embraced her weeping chil¬ dren, and mingled her tears with theirs. — Ellen briefly mentioned what had been done; fire requested Mr. Evelyn with them would examine all the papers that might be found, and if no particular directions appeared, re¬ signed the whole to his judgment and manage¬ ment j by the time he returned he was happy to
to find the violence of their grief subsided into a calm melancholy, such as must natu¬ rally take place from a calamity so recent and severe. At the request >1Iilt'‘*'of the young ladies he looked over all the papers, letters, &c. in a private drawer ot the late Mr. Woodville’s was a schedule of all his effects : The princi¬ pal estate devolved to the nearest male heir, a very distant relation, and a peer ; the residue of his fortune, amounting to nearly twelve thousand pounds, a great part of which had been Hived by the strict economy in which the family had lived for many years past, he had given in the paper, which was written by him¬ self, and signed by his two servants as wit¬ nesses, jointly between his two daughters when they came of age, who were also entitled to their mother’s fortune of eight thousand pounds at her death, altogether amounting to near ten thousand each. It was evident, there¬ fore, Mr. Woodville had retired from the world with a view to save something for his children, but there was no neceflity to abjure society, and by indulging discontent and a re¬ pining
pining spirit, permit lassitude and an habitual idleness.to creep upon him, render him en¬ tirely inactive, dead to every tender affection¬ ate sentiment, and at length subdued every sense of religion by urging him to desperation and suicide.,Mr. Evelyn thought it was necessary to acquaint the heir at law of a late event, and enquiring his name, was struck with astonish¬ ment on being told it was Lord A—, his quondam patron, who had been so unfortu¬ nately compelled to break his promises. — Julia observing a mixture of surprise and con¬ cern in his countenance, at the name, which she had only heard that day from her mother, very innocently asked if lie knew Lord A—. I do, Madam, slightly know him, answered he, and wish the intelligence lie ought to have could be conveyed to him through other hands than mine. Doubtless you have par¬ ticular reasons which we have no right to en¬ quire into, said Ellen, and therefore, if it will not be improper, and you will dictate to me, I will write to him. To this proposal he gladly
gladly assented, and as a few lines only were necessary, limply to announce his accession to the estate, there could be no impropriety in her writing, and this was accordingly done. The furniture and plate having been mostly purchased by their great grandfather, was part of their property, and was at that time in possession of the gentleman to whom the estate was let. They found in the schedule an ex¬ act inventory of'every thing, which Mr. Evelyn copied and sent to the gentleman, re- quefting he would retain them in his posses¬ sion until further notice. This business being dispatched, he took leave of the ladies with equal reluctance on all fides, for that night and the following day, promifirjg to wait on them and devote himself to their service on Monday, for the ensuing week.,This intermediate time they employed in the moss affectionate endeavours to comfort their mother; she sought to moderate her af¬ fliction and comply with their wishes, that the grief and terror of their minds might receive no aggravation from her, but she had fustain-,3 ed
ed a shock never to be forgotten, the stronger her reason grew the more acute was her dis¬ tress, and from that hour, though she was in some degree restored to comparative health, and after a certain time to an assumed cheer¬ fulness, her spirits never more returned, she might be said to endure life, but never to en¬ joy it. Alas! she knew not the evils she was yet to experience, and how weak and mis¬ taken short-sighted mortals are, when they suppose their miseries are at the height, and that they can bear no more 1 "•-¬-¬'‘’_',CHAP. X.,lirHEN Mr. Evelyn returned to them,* ' ' on Monday, he had the pleasure of seeing Mrs. Woodville capable of being fora few hours taken from her bed, though ex¬ ceeding
ceeding wcJ< and languid 3 and the young ladies with that composed melancholy which feeling minds, governed by sense and religion, with a resignation to the will of Providence, might be supposed to feel. Pie took upon himself the care of the funeral, and as Mrs. Woodville had the sole charge ofher children, and their fortunes, he had no one to consult out of the family.,When this melancholy duty was paid, and the house restored to tranquillity, he began to feel very painful ideas, from the apprehension, that they would possibly soon quit that coun¬ try where every moment recalled horrid scenes to their remembrance : Hitherto he had sub¬ mitted patiently to his degraded and mortifying situation, but Julia, young as she was, had in¬ spired him with other sentiments ; he saw him¬ self cut off from all hopes of being a candidate for her favor; she had a right to look forward to a brilliant establishment, he a poor country curate, without pretensions to fortune or friepds, it was presumption, it was madness for him to indulge sentiments of tenderness for
for an object that was, in every point of view, so infinitely superior to his humble merit. What then thought he, ought I to do ? Must I give up the delightful satisfaction of seeing, of serving this charming girl, and her family, or shall I, by persevering in my attentions, fix an arrow in my heart that must embitter my future days ? Alas! ’till this moment I never considered the extent of my misfortunes, nor the happiness which rank and affluence might procure; yet, whatever is to be the conse¬ quence to myself ’tis my duty equally with my inclination to render myself useful to Mrs. Woodville.,Whilst these conflicts were pasting in the mind of this worthy young man, the filters were not unmindful of him. Ellen, from the hour she first saw him, felt a strong bias in his favor, which every day had strengthened, nor can it be wondered at, when we consider he was the only man, out-of her own family, she had ever seen; she carefully observed every look and action, and very'soon wa$ sensible of his preference towards her filter.,vol: i. H Never
Never particularly fond of Julia, she now be¬ gan to hate her, to view her with envy and dislike—from whence, cried she, can this par¬ tiality to her arise, she is not near so handsome as myself, and much inferior«in her under - standing, a meer insipid sentimental child, fit only to dandle about her mother; surely I mutt be miftaken, ’tis impossible he can think of her otherwise than as a wonderful affection¬ ate daughter, because she has the art of sooth¬ ing and pleasing my mother—I am resolved, however, added (he, to watch them both, and endeavour to gain his affections if I can, for in all the books I have read there has beep some artful girl to occasion difficulties, or there would be no such entertaining adven¬ tures, no distresses that at length produce such delightful events, and bring the heroines to perfect happiness.,Far different were the sentiments of Julia j she admired, she esteemed Mr. Evelyn, she was grateful for his kindness to her family, she beheld him with the innocent affection of a sister, nor did her young h^art entertain one thought
thought of love or preference, /he wished in¬ deed he could have a situation more corres¬ pondent to his merits, but file had heard from her mother, and the memoir of Mrs. Dan¬ vers corroborated the relation, that the world abounded with wicked vicious perlons, that temptations assailed every man, and that it required a strong judgment, and much forti¬ tude, with a good heart, to withstand perni¬ cious precepts and worse examples. Is, thought file, he is good, happy in himself and contented with his humble situation, it might be doing him an injury to wish him otherwise than he is 3 I will try to learn if he has that content, or if pecuniary favors can be any ways conveyed to him without wounding his de¬ licacy.,In pursuance of this intention, the very first opportunity that offered, when herself and fitter only were present with him, after some little hesitation she alked, if he had always resided in that country. No, madam, he re¬ plied with a deep figh, ’tis not quite five years since I came into it. Does any part of your Ha fa /
family or relations live here, laid Ellen. I have no family, no relations, but one dear parent, who resides far from hence, though in a situation unworthy her merits. Pardon me, Sir, said Julia, and if 1 am impertinently cu¬ rious pray repress my presumption, but I think the situation of her son does not accord with his inclinations, nor with that philanthropy which it appears to me would rather court than flrun society. Indeed, Madam, replied Mr. Evelyn, I have but few obligations to society, yet I should despise myself is, from selfish motives, I omitted, in any one instance, the duty every individual owes to those who want his services. O, cried Ellen, with much vivacity, you have then experienced disap¬ pointments, dear Mr. Evelyn tell us your story, I am sure it will entertain us, and con¬ vince Julia, that there is more reality than she chuses to allow in the dismal stories we read in books. Fye, filter, exclaimed Julia, if, as you suppose, Mr. Evelyn should have met with any disagreeable occurrences, mult they not be painful for him to relate, and can we be
be entertained with the relation ? ’Tis true. Madam, replied he, I have met with unplea¬ sant but no uncommon events, and my story, which Miss Woodville is desirous of knowing, is limply this — My father was a clergyman and possessed a good living, my mother is one of the best of women, I was an only and con¬ sequently a much loved child. I was brought up to the church, and promised a very con¬ siderable living by a nobleman, on which promise my father depended, and consequently fought no other interest for me; he died soon after I was in orders, and, from the natural goodness of heart that taught him to befriend his fellow creatures, he left but very little behind him, scarcely sufficient to provide for the frugal wants of my mother. I applied to the nobleman whom I had been taught to consider as my patron and friend, I meta dis¬ appointment — Without friends, intereft, or money, T was compelled to solicit a curacy, and most fortunately had an appointment in this parish. This ladies, added he, affecting a smile, is my eVentful history, which, in all,H 3 probability
probability will close here. O, no, cried Ellen, that is impossible, depend upon it you will yet be the hero of some beautiful novel, or delightful romance.,A summons to Mrs. Woodville’s apart¬ ment prevented further conversation, than Julia slightly enquiring where Mrs. Evelyn resided, and wa* informed at Chichester.,When they attended Mrs. Woodville, she had an open letter in her hand, and another en the table before her. I have a letter from my Lord A—, laid lhe, and here is also an inclosed one for you, Ellen. Whilst Miss Woodville eagerly examined the contents of hef’s, her mother added, his Lordship writes with the utmost kindneis and attention to our interests; as we never had much intercourse after we left London, I did not expect: this civility from him; but there is a request that gives me much pain. O, my dear mother, exclaimed Ellen, pray, pray comply with it, -What an elegant letter ! What a charming man ! My dear Julia, his Lordship desires to,meet
meet us at Woodville-Hall, I long to go of all things, I hope you will comply, Madam. I scarce know what I ought to do, answered she, my own feelings mutt be sacrificed to the interests of my children, and as we are not expected for this fortnight to come, if my strength will permit me to undertake the journey, I believe it is proper I should do it; yet, what painful, what dreadful recollections will follow! Tears flowed down her cheeks. Do not, my dear mother, said Julia, think, of this journey on our account, if productive of pain to yourself; what do we want of Lord A— ? A protector, an introductor to the world, answered Ellen hastily, we are not always to live here, you know, did not our — Here she ftopt in some confusion. Mrs. Woodville turned full upon her—how should she know we were not to live here, and whSt was you going to fay ? The agitation both daughters appeared in surprised her, brought on several questions they could not evade, and ended in a confession, that they had a letter, which hitherto, from want of resolution,,H4,they
they had delayed to communicate. In L trembling voice die defired it might be brought to her, and when Ellen produced it requested to be alone. They obeyed reluc- t: ndy, apprehensive of the effects upon her weak state of health, and though they quitted the room, Julia placed herself at the door to be ready if any assistance was necessary.,She heard repeated heavy fighs and faint exclamations, and in about twenty minutes the bell rung: Hastily entering the room she saw her mother laying back in her chair the image of death; stie instantly forced down a few drops of hartshorn and water, and pre¬ vented her from fainting. When a little re¬ covered, she embraced her daughter — My dear Julia, what a letter! O what anguish has it planted here, putting her hand to her breast 3 but I will not afflict: you, retire, my child, a few hours hence I trust I shall fee you with more composure ; fearful of fainting I pulled the bell, I am now better, and shall lay down for an hour or two. Julia kissed her •hand, assisted her to the bed, and retired in silence
silence, unable to speak from the variety of emotions that almost overpowered her.,When Julia entered the parlour her sister was in close conversation with Mr. Evelyn, who seemed to have the traces of sorrow and anxiety in his countenance ; rising at her en¬ trance, he enquired after Mrs. Woodville — She could not command her tears—My dear Madam, said Evelyn, tears trembling in his eyes also, your too great sensibility will injure your health, do not fear your good mother’s convalescence, when this one stroke, so long impending over her, and the concealment of which has cost you so much pain, has ex¬ pended itself^ her religion and good sense will teach her resignation, and an unrepining ac¬ quiescence to the Divine Will. Heaven grant it may be so, answered Julia, .with a sigh, dry¬ ing her tears and approaching her sister, who expressing her wise es to the fame purpose, put Lord A—-’s letter into her hand. It con¬ tained " very polite thanks for the favor of her communicatioh, which he was sorry could only be obtained by giving pain to herself.;,,HS . said.
laid, he had written to request the honor of meeting Mrs. Woodville and family at Wood- ville-Hall, as he should himself be there within a fortnight, having written to the present pos- sesfor to be prepared for resigning the house by that time—every thing that friendship and attention could bestow, independent of justice, Mrs. Woodville and her daughters might be assured of experiencing from a friendly heart, anxious to serve them.”,Well sister, cried Ellen, I think our prof- pects now begin to brighten ; a man of rank, like Lord A—, for our friend, will introduce us to the first company, and I dare fay he will take us to London. O, what happiness I promise to myself there ! Happiness 1 re¬ peated Julia, I fear it will be long first before memory will permit us to enjoy happiness. ’Tis our duty to endeavour for it, Miss, an¬ swered she, with an air of scorn, particularly as you possess “ fortitude to carry you through the evils of life, which less collected minds might sink under.” This reproach to her sensibility, and the cruel allusion to an expref-,6 sion
fion in her father’s letter, hurt Julia extremely, but flie would not venture at a reply, and in the fame moment Mr. Evelyn said, I have received a letter from Mr. Fitzmaurice, he tells me he has permission, without saying from whom that permission comes, to pro- mhe Sarah Mills the annuity Mrs: Danvers had requested, and also to confirm the gift of her cloaths and other effects; at the fame time enclosing a bank note for twenty pounds, entreating my acceptance of it, and a direc¬ tion where Sarah is to draw for her money when due, which is briefly the contents of the letter.,This seasonable information restored har¬ mony between the sisters, and Miss Wood¬ ville, with a more placid countenance said, under the presumption we should soon leave this place, Julia, I have been endeavouring to persuade our friend, Mr. Evelyn, to accom- p>any us: To what purpose, asked the other, with a look of surprise, or where to ? Why, to Woodville-Hall, to be sure, and who knows but we may prevail on Lord A— to,H 6 trive
give him a better living. You are exceed¬ ingly good to me. Madam, cried he with some confusion, but I dare not profit by it; and, although I shall ever think with bitter regret on the hour which separates me from a fa¬ mily that honors me with such distinguished favor, I fear that hour will be the last happy one I shall ever know, and this spot wist bound my wishes for ever. His last words were pronounced in a melancholy tone, that as¬ sessed Julia, and made even Miss Woodville look grave. But in truth, that young lady’s heart had undergone great changes within these last few hours — the prospect of going to mix with a world she had formed such bright and flattering ideas of; the being re¬ lated to a man of rank, and introduced under his protection, were such delightful circum¬ stances, as entirely got the better of all those tender thoughts she had indulged towards Evelyn, and although she would not have been sorry to have seen him in her train, and. to have had him witness the splendour she expected to meet at Woodville-Hall, where already
already a lively imagination had carried her, and pictured a thousand beauties, yet fire felt very little comparative reluctance to give up his acquaintance, when contrasted with the expectations this letter of Lord A—’s had taught her to form. Julia, whose imagination was free from all tincture of romance, felt real pain from the idea of leaving a young man of so much worth in a solitary place, where ge¬ nius could not be cultivated, and merit mutt be buried in obscurity : She cherished the hint her fitter had dropped relative to Lord A—, and thought, if indeed he should prove an amiable man, and a friend, she might find an opportunity to recommend Mr. Evelyn.,In a few days Mrs. Woodville recovered sufficiently to write his Lordship, and accord¬ ing, with the wishes of her daughters, and the duty she conceived owing to the future establishment of her children, she accepted his invitation, and promised to join him at the time appointed. Preparations were now began to be formed'for quitting Woodland-Castle, and reducing their houstiold. Mr. Wood¬ ville
ville had bought the estate, and much im - proved it; the furniture was antique but use¬ ful, yet to fell would raise a very trifling sum; there was a good deal of stock in the grounds, and a plentiful garden : After several conver¬ sations between the mother and daughters, Mr. Evelyn was one evening called to the council table, and Mrs. Woodville thus ad¬ dressed him. .,Long before I saw Mr. Evelyn I felt a re¬ verence for his character, from the report of a domestic indeed, but these people are not often mistaken, and generally speak from the heart. With us that character is confirmed, and we owe you a thousand obligations. — Dear Madam, cried he, interrupting her, un¬ less you wish to drive me hence, do not re¬ peat the word, or cherish the idea. Well, Sir, answered she, I will spare your delicacy in my preface, and now put your friendship to the test: This estate being part of my daughters fortunes, we do not at present mean to dispose of, we therefore request the favor of you to quit the parsonage, and reside here;,our
our plan is this — Sarah Mills has enough to live very comfortably on, our old servant de¬ serves, at her time of life, to have the fame indulgence, she shall have an equal annuity; they like this retired situation, let them take care of the parsonage for the rector. But, dear Madam, said the astonished Mr. Evelyn. Permit me, Sir, to go on, continued she, this castle is not so large as convenient, it is toler¬ ably stocked, Anthony knows how to manage it, he will be thankful if you will retain him in your service; here you may accommodate Mrs. Evelyn, who will doubtless rejoice to be with you : In fine, Sir, we entreat your ac¬ ceptance of this house, the stock and produce of the estate, until Julia is of age, or you meet with a more eligible situation ; comply with our joint requests, my amiable friend, and you will confer a more lasting obligation on us than words can express. Giving a paper into his hand she arose, and, followed by her daughters quitted the room, leaving Mr. Evelyn under the greatest agitation and asto¬ nishment.,Opening
Opening the paper he found it a formal renounciation of the estate, its stock and ad¬ vantages, free from all incumbrances or Ioffes whatsoever, for five years certain, without be¬ ing accountable for any rents or monies paid him from the produce therefore; and the two servants’ wages to be paid by Mrs. Wood- ville, as necessary to be kept on the efface.,Never was conflict greater than poor Evelyn now sustained. His pride, his love, (though he would not to himself allow the idea) re¬ volted against receiving such very consider¬ able obligations; he well knew the advan?- tages from the cattle and grounds were above sixty pounds a year, exclusive of his own li¬ ving; the acceptance of it,, he thought, de¬ graded him in his own eyes, and muff leffen his consequence in theirs; yet, said he, should I refuse it from any other than the mother of Julia ?. Should I not rather rejoice, to offer my worthy parent such, an asylum, and fave a little for future comforts in her decline of life ? Ah! what then but a false pride, a still more blameable sentiment that never can meet, never ought.
ought to obtain encouragement, renders my mind repugnant to owe an obligation to Mrs. Woodville. Yes, Julia, yes, charming Julia, I will prove myself unworthy of your love by living the object of your bounty ; ’lis the most effectual curb to my presumptuous wishes to feel myself a dependant, and know the impossibility of realizing flattering dreams that must ever prove illusive, and injure the object I shall ever adore.,Ina spirit of bravery, or rather a fit of de¬ spair, he wrote Mrs. Woodville a few lines, and accepted her generous offer, all but as to the payment of the servants wages ; " I muff either confider them, said he, as your servants or mine; if yours, I have no authority over them, and cannot expect to be obeyed, because I shall conceive I have not a right of dismis¬ sion should they behave improperly: If they .are mine, I muff be allowed to pay them and be their master; if they deserve it they shall meet double encouragement, as your servants and mine also.” . Mrs. Woodville and her daughters were, delighted with his acceptance,of
of this proof of their friendship, upon hid own terms, and Julia having mentioned to her mother the contracted income of Mrs. Evelyn, two twenty pound notes were sent, under a cover, with only these words, " A small tribute to merit from the hand of friend¬ ship/’ addressed to that lady at Chichester.,Behold, my dear children, the real value of riches and independence, said Mrs. Wood¬ ville, when it gives the power of repaying benches, and gratifying your own feelings, by shifting those, who possibly with more merit, yet less fortunate than yourselves, ’ suffer pe¬ cuniary wants. O, my dear girls, cried ihe, with much emotion, learn to estimate money not as subservient to the pride and vanity of fols love, but as it affords the delightful gra¬ tification of making others happy.,The ladies were now busily engaged in preparations for their departure; Sarah Mills and their old and faithful servant, although they acknowledged the comforts of the situ¬ ation designed for them, and their inability,to
to undertake so long a journey, yet from gra¬ titude and affection looked forward to the day of separation with sighs and tears that deeply affected Mrs. Woodville, but her con¬ sideration for their age, as well as her own convenience, obliged her to leave them be¬ hind, as she thought, comfortably provided for, under the care of Mr. Evelyn. But no language can describe his feelings, nor the difficulty he had to suppress his emotions from being too visible, as the day grew near that was announced for their intende d journey. Very different were the sensations that agi¬ tated him and the family; parting from Julia was to him the separation of foul and body, and, as he conceived, the last day of his ex¬ istence, for life would henceforth be a blank. Mrs. Woodville,though oppressed by sorrow, and every object around her reminding her of a dismal event that wrung her heart and impaired her constitution, yet dreaded the idea of again returning to a world abounding with temptations, falfhood, and deceit, with pbjects so dear' to her foul, and so little pre¬ pared to encounter the evils that might sur¬ round
round them; flic therefore looked forward with a painful anxiety that lessened the hor¬ ror of past scenes.,Julia, naturally fond of retirement, could derive to herself but little pleasure from the expectations of gay life ; foe thought, within die bosom of her family, with such a friend as Mr. Evelyn, and perhaps the addition of his mother,1Iilfs'*’‘'s company, foe could have palled her time both pleasantly and usefully, without a single sigh for enjoyments, foe had formed but very indifferent ideas of to herselfyet, as fols gratification was ever the kast part of her consideration, foe thought the removal of her mother from such scenes as must conti¬ nually remind her of paft afflictions, and the anxious desire expressed by her lifter to ac¬ cept Lord A—',’*‘”'s invitation, were such strong inducements as required foe should cheerfully subscribe to them, and relinquish her own wishes without regret.,Mils Woodville was indeed the only per¬ son gratified by this intended visit. She pe¬ rused
rused again and again some of her favorite books, which informed her how much beau¬ tiful girls, with the advantages of novelty and proper introduction were entitled to expect admiration ; she already anticipated conquests, adventures, duels, and many other strange and unnatural events, such as are too often retailed iri those dangerous publications, that poison the minds of young inexperienced girls, and embitter their future days. Poor Evelyn funk into insignificance, in a compa¬ rative light, with her present views, and she no longer envied Julia the preference of his attachment, on the contrary, would have re¬ joiced if slie could have been left behind, the object of his devoirs only.,The day at length came, every eye was suffused with tears, every heart was oppressed with sorrow at the hour of separation, ex¬ cept the exulting Ellen’s. Evelyn unable to speak, kissed their hands in expressive silence, Julia pressed his, and bid him adieu in a fal¬ tering voice, and a torrent of tears running down her checks j whilst their old faithful,Jane
166 JJLLEN AND JULIA.,Jane and Sarah Mills lifted their hands to heaven, imploring blessings bn their benefac¬ tress. Mrs. Woodville commended them to the care of Mr. Evelyn, and requested the favor of his correspondence, a request that gave him a momentary delight, even in that hour of sorrow, when he saw himself torn from all his hopes qpd wishes. The ladies, with the young woman who had resided with them some yearS at Woodland-Castle, and their servant Thomas, the only attendants they took with them, proceeded on their long and tedious journey, so much occupied by their different sentiments that they held very little conversation but what the different places and roads they pasted gave rife to, for to Julia every thing was new, and Miss Woodville could recall but very few traces of what she had formerly seen, to her remem¬ brance.,CHAP.
ELLEN AND JULIA.,167,CHAP. XL,- - '.',THEY at length, without any accident, arrived at Woodville Hall: the mag¬ nificence of its appearance surprised and pleased the young people, but their mother shrunk back involuntarily from its view for a few moments. Ah! thought she, how dif¬ ferent are my sensations now from those I felt when I at first alighted here, the declared mistress of this charming place, with the loved object of all my wishes, and a respectable mother to whom I was dear. Alas! I am now alone with the important charge of two dear objects, for whose future con¬ duct in life I feel myself responsible, and who are now about to enter into a troublesome world ! The sight whish accompanied these reflections
reflections had scarce iflued from her bosom, when the carriage drew up to the door and two of Lord A—’s servants in rich liveries attended to osier their services.,They were no sooner alighted and shewn into a parlour, than his Lordship hastily en¬ tered to welcome them : He advanced to Mrs. Woodville, who was almost fainting, from the violence of her emotions, and thank¬ ed her in the warmest terms for the honor she confered on him; then, turning to the young ladies, he was almost struck dumb with sur¬ prise at seeing two such beautiful girls, drest in the plainest style, and in the deepest mourn¬ ing, made in a very uncommon manner, for Mrs. Woodville had always accustomed them to make every thing for themselves, and they being left to their own fancy, dressed in a whimsical though becoming style, without knowing any thing of the fashion of the times; His Lordship recovering himself, paid his compliments to them with that fascinating politeness men of the world know how to as- sume, and conducted the ladies to the drawing,room.
room, where, with a warmth that appeared to proceed from an affectionate good heart, he requested Mrs. Woodville to consider her¬ self as mistress of that house and himself as her visitor.,Mr. Selwyn, the gentleman who had rented the estate, was then introduced, being stilt a resident in the house, at Lord A—’s request, until every thing should be settled with Mrs, Woodville, and as neither of them knew more of the melancholy catastrophe that had taken place than merely the death of Mr. Woodville in a natural way, they supposed the very profound dejection visible in the mo¬ ther and youngest daughter, was naturally augmented by the loss of so considerable an estate 3 both gentlemen, therefore, exerted their utmost efforts to dispel their sorrow, and Mr. Selwyn, on Lord A— ’s leaving the room, Ipoke highly of his generosity and noble in¬ tentions. He viewed the young ladies with marks of strong admiration, but Miss Wood¬ ville was delighted to perceive the eyes of both gentlemen dwelt longest on her, and,,vol. i. I with
j7o ELLEN AND JULIA.,with those who admired exterior charms only, it was impoflible it should be otherwise, for she really was a striking figure, and to all ap¬ pearance a charming young woman. Julia, whole mind was clouded with sorrow at the apparent distress her mother struggled with, and whose beauties were not of the obtrusive kind, though extremely interesting, they be¬ held as a lovely young girl that gave promise of more charrhs hereafter.,As the ladies arrived before dinner, when they were conducted to the dining room, sur¬ prise and admiration struck the younger ones at the superb entertainment provided, the quantity of plate, the number of dishes, the servants, and, in short, the whole appendage, was all wonderful, and consequently delight¬ ful to them; nor did the gentlemen escape their notice.,Lord A— was at this time near two and forty, but a good person, an air of fashion, rich deaths, and all the other advantages of the toilet, might make him, even in the eyes cf
of the discerning, very well pass for at least ten years younger; his manners and address were polite and affectionate, he behaved with a re/pect that conciliated the hearts of his com¬ pany towards him, and engaged their highest esteem. Mr. Selwyn was allo turned of forty, but being always attached to the country, and residing there at least nine months out of twelve, he neglected the arts of fashionable dress, and though perfectly genteel in his ap¬ pearance, and manners was supposed to be full as old as in reality he was, and which he fought no methods to disguise; Lord A—> had therefore all the advantages on his fide ; in the eyes of Mils Woodville he was little less than a divinity; the splendour which sur¬ rounded her realized all her visions, and she fancied she was indeed in a fairy palace, of which he was the sovereign, and would soon be at her feet, as the princess he adored : —, Delighted with her ideas she became animated and talkative, and having a large share of animal spirits, with a good flow of words, she entirely engrossed the admiration of the gen-,I 2 tiemen.
tiemen, who payed her such particular atten¬ tion and such an abundance of compliments, as threw her into an ecstacy of delight, at the fame time her too great vivacity very much displeased her mother, who several times strove, though vainly, to repress her volti - bility.,Julia was equally gratified by the fine things she saw, and the kindness which they experi¬ enced from Lord A—, but being thrown in the back ground by her sifter, and the natural modesty and timidity of her disposition, she contented herself with expressing her silent approbation, and with answers of attentive politeness whenever site was addressed.,- In the evening of this memorable day Mr. Selwyn being out of the room, Lord A—■ arose from his chair, and approaching Mrs. Woodville, I must beg leave, said he, to re¬ peat what I said this day, that in this house you aie mistress : Mr. Selwyn informs me, the eRate round the Hall which he rented, is about eight hundred a year, exclusive of what,is
is rented by farmers : The hall, and the part Mr. Selwyn had, I here solemnly restore to you and these young ladies jointly, and shall prepare a deed accordingly, to ratify my in¬ tention ; you have a jointure of the same va¬ lue on the Hampshire estate, the income of both may enable you to live decently, on less it is impossible : As a relation, you have a claim on me, independent of being heir to estates I never wished to possess. But, my Lord, interrupted the astonished Mrs. Wood¬ ville, you are perhaps unacquainted with our affairs, economy has enabled us to give my daughters fix thousand each, added to which, at my death, they divide eight thousand more, consequently my jointure is sufficient for all our wants. Pardon me, Madam, you may think so, but I do not; I am already possessed of near twenty thousand a year, by what has lately fallen in to me I have seven thousand more, I want it not, yet unfortunately have not the power to give it back, but this house, and the trifling estate round it, I can and will make over to you and your daughters, for,I 3 your
*74,ELLEN AND JULIA.,your joint lives, and though I cannot give away the estates, the income of them is in my own disposal, and the Miss Woodvilles will, I hope, look upon me as their steward, to sup¬ ply every wish they can form 5 henceforth Madam, added he, as he quitted the room, you will have the goodness to direct the house¬ keeper and servants, they are yours, and will receive orders from none but you. Bowing to them and wishing them a good night, he quitted them, leaving every mouth, open to express their admiration and delight of stick noble behaviour.,Mrs. Woodville, who from painful experi¬ ence had learnt to distrust the profestions of mankind, yet nevertheless, in this instance, could not but be sensible of extraordinary generosity and kindness, at the lame time that she wished to avoid accepting obligations for which she saw no necessity. Ellen being quite enthusiastic in her praises of his Lord- ship, h’s perlon, his air, and his generosity, were such proofs of a superior nobleness of mind, that she warmly congratulated herself for
for writing to him, and for persuading her mother to accept his invitation. What a stoic you are, Julia, cried she, I hate such apathy and appearance of indifference to prospects so delightful as ours. Indeed, my dear Ellen, you accuse me unjustly, I feel as warmly as you can the kindness of Lord A—• to my mother, I admire the nobleness of his sentiments, and the dignity of his person, but if I may be allowed to speak freely, I think a generous mind ought not to accept all that an open liberal heart may confer, particularly circumstanced as we are—What are our wants? Have we not enough to live genteelly upon, and much more than we could either expect: or hope for ? Why then submit to the weight of obligations that must always give pain to minds of sensibility ? You speak my senti¬ ments exactly, my dear child, said Mrs. Woodville; hi^ Lordship's kindness gives me real concern; I wish, to avoid displeasing him, or to appear ungrateful, but at the fame time I think we should do wrong to accept his offers: Believe me, my dear children, 14 happiness
happiness dees not consist in splendour or riches, you have sufficient to procure you a genteel, though perhaps not a splendid efta- bh/hment, and let me tell you, that the man v, ho should hereafter pay his addresses to either of you, and think your own fortunes insuhicient, will be unworthy of your smallest regard; let your virtues, your characters, re¬ commend you, a/id you may look for perma¬ nent happiness, at least as lasting as the in¬ certitude of all cur enjoyments here can be.,But, dear Madam, said Ellen, it appears to me that his Eord hr ip, so far from intend¬ ing to confer an obligation, considers his in¬ tentions as an act of justice, and the accept¬ ance of which will oblige him. I should be sorry, my dear child, replied Mrs. Woodville, if the failhood, deceit, and duplicity I have experienced in life should render me unjustly suspicious; apparently my Eord A— can have no views but for our accommodation in the liberality, of his offers, but mankind is too often deep, false, and designing, and some¬ times we allow ourselves to be imposed upon by
by the tinsel appearances of virtue and gene¬ rosity, when the motives, if known, are little entitled to our praise. Dear Madam, laid she, interrupting her, what improper motives can Lord A— have ? I hope none, answer¬ ed Mrs. Woodville, and far be it from me to le hen or detract from the merit which appears due to his kindness; however, I shall consider the matter with attention, before I give an aisent or denial, and you may be assured, my dear Ellen, the real interests of my children shall be my governing principle.,They both thanked her, but with different hopes. Ellen flattered herself, that to secure a noble independance to her children must be for their real interests; whilst Julia, satisfied with a handsome mediocrity of fortune, thought it would lessen their consequence if they were indebted, for an advancement of it, to favor, and a sense of obligation.,Two or th re? days passed in mutual endea¬ vours to amuse and entertain each other, and during this time each made their respective,I 5. observations
observations and discoveries on the temper and disposition of one another.,Lord A—, who was at first fight struck with the beauty and figure of Miss Wood¬ ville, studied her character and from his per¬ fect knowledge of female deceptions, was soon convinced she was blest with a strong natural conception and understanding, but tinctured with a great deal of vanity, feif consequence, and volatility j unacquainted with the world, almost a stranger to mankind, he conceived the first who should flatter and encourage those propensities in her disposition, would scarcely fail of gaining her heart. Lord A— was, in himself one ot those mixed and unde¬ cided characters common to be met with in life ; he was naturally generous, humane, and liberals he was no gambler nor spendthrifts he had a noble fortune, and lived within his income." When he heard of Mr. Woodville,>fsXx'’'s death, and previous to that understood he was comparatively poor, and had left a, widow with two daughters slenderly provided for, the natural benevolence of his temper inclined him
him to give up a part of the additional for¬ tune fallen to him, for their accommodation, although ’tis probable he did not at firfl? in¬ tend such very liberal offers as the view of Ellen’s person inspired. In the general run of characters Lord A— might have passed for an unexceptionable man, but one dark shade obscured and tarnished all his virtues—his passion was women ; marriage he could not bear the idea o£ he had seen so many un- happy pairs in that state, and saw so much degeneracy in the manners of the ladies, that he abjured all thoughts of a connexion that only appeared to open a new field for dissipa¬ tion and licenfcioufnefs in both sexes. In his pursuit of women, therefore, he observed no measures, he looked upon them as fair game, and supposing no young woman could be ig¬ norant of the respect due to herself nor de¬ void of that modesty and delicacy of manners, generally inherent in their dispositions, when¬ ever he found a relaxation from those princi- ples, tly barrier was, in his opinion, broken, and he scrupled not, by every means in his,16 power.
power, to take his advantages. Warm in his passions, and not much accustomed to en¬ counter difficulties, we have seen in the in¬ stance of Mr. Evelyn’s protogee, Kitty, that he would not give up a favorite point very eaffiy; his disappointment there mortified and vexed him; he was sensible he had behaved improperly towards the Evelyn’s, and left their house to avoid remonstrances he knew was deserved—from the natural depravity of the human heart when conscious of being wrong, he detested the name of the family, and when he received young Evelyn’s application, was glad of an opportunity to throw them off for ever.,More than once, however, after that, his heart smote him, he enquired after their situ¬ ation, and being told Evelyn had two livings instead of curacies, and his mother comfort¬ ably fettled, he ceased reproaching or con¬ cerning himselfany more about them. From this description of character it is plain, ifLord A— had his errors, he was not without Iris virtues, and a propriety of conduct in the fe¬ male
male world might have stamped him what they pleated, so passionately was he devoted to them, and so much did he reverence a truly virtuous character.,No wonder then that the fight of Miss Woodville should ’have an instantaneous effect: upon a susceptible heart, like his, and incline him to the most liberal offers. On a nearer investigation he saw thole shades in her dis¬ position which lefiened his esteem, though his admiration of her charms increased hourly. Very different was his opinion of Julia; she was not striking but interesting, the did not dazzle the eye, or mislead the heart, by a brilliancy of complexion or a flow of .wit, but she was fascinating, she grew upon the eye, and on every examination appeared more lovely, modest, sensible, but unassuming ; she created esteem and commanded respect; Lord A— involuntarily paid her that homage, tho’ captivated by the beauty of her sifter.,Mr. Selwyn was at first equally struck with Miss Woodville, but the milder charms ot her
her sister insensibly gained upon his heart, and induced him to wish he had been a few years younger, that he might have formed some pretensions to her favor; but as the great disparity in age precluded his indulgence of tender sentiments, he entertained a friendship and an esteem for her which he ever invari¬ ably preserved, through all the difficult scenes of her life. •,fs#<'*‘',Ellen was so highly gratified by the atten¬ tion and warm encomiums of Lord A—, that she preserved no measures of decorum, and too evidently discovered the satisfaction she felt, and her partiality in his favor. Mrs. Woodville, alarmed by her observations, thought it highly necessary to be speedily de¬ cisive in her resolutions, and therefore one morning, about a week after their arrival, she requested the favor of an hour’s private con¬ versation with Lord A—.,Having attended her with much respect to the library, he waited her commands with some anxiety, which the very serious cast of her
her countenance gave rise to. My Lord, said Mrs. Woodville, after some hesitation, I hope you do me the justice to believe, no one can be more truly sensible of your unexam¬ pled generosity and liberality than I am ; but I should be extremely unworthy of your esteem if I accepted such proofs of it as mutt lessen me in my own eyes, and lay my chil¬ dren under obligation, that to feeling minds would ever be painful. Good God ! Madam, cried his Lordship, interrupting her, you do me the highest injustice in a misconception of my intentions; my fortune is already beyond my wants; I cannot conceive, whatever the law allows me, that I have any right to Mr. Woodville's, whilst his widow and children are alive, yet, to avoid offending your delicacy, I was willing to enter into an unjust compro¬ mise, and by resigning a meer trifle to the young ladies, retain the far greater part to myself. My Lord, answered she, I have the warmest sense of your kindness, and do justice to your motives, but, you will consider, my children have been brought up in the plainest manner,,5
manner, without the smallest: expectations of any fortune, consequently the ample one they will po kiefs, in their own right, is splendor to them, and indeed sufficient for any woman whose views are not romantic. You must therefore pardon me, my Lord, if I absolutely decline profiting by your intended liberality, though, whilst I live, your generosity will ever have a first place in my remembrance. You will not then, Madam, condescend to remain at Woodville-Hall, said he, with a disturbed air. I can venture to appeal to your Lord - ship’s judgment, is, after my declaration, I ought to do so for any time. I hope, Madam, replied he, encouraged a little by her last words, you will not hastily remove; at this season a month or fix weeks in the country will be perfectly agreeable; you will have time to consult on your future residence, and unless I am so unhappy as to have given you offence, I may flatter myself, as a relation and friend, you will permit me to be of service to you.,I
I thank you most cordially, my Lord, for your kind offers, which 1 accept with plea¬ sure, and can form no objection to your po¬ lite invitation of resting a month here, unless any plan should occur for fixing suddenly in an eligible situation, which I think is not very probable, and on every such occurrence I shall conceive it my duty to consult your Lordship.,They now parted, with more contentment on the fide of Mrs. Woodville than of Lord A—:; she rejoiced to get over a difficulty that had the appearance of ingratitude, and re¬ solved not to flay beyond the month, nor so long, if a situation could be met with agree¬ able to her wishes, as she absolutely excepted against going to London. His Lordship, on the other hand,was planing a thousand schemes to keep them there until he could be assured of Miss Woodville’s partiality for him, and then he hoped, with her assistance, to prevail on her mother to visit town.,Mean
Mean time Mrs. Woodville was commu¬ nicating to her daughters the preceding con- veriation; to her infinite surprise Ellen ex- presed her discontent in terms of such vex¬ ation and disrespect, as greatly alarmed her. " I am sorry, my dear Ellen, you express so much dissatisfaction, it is my sole wish to act in every respect as I think moss conducive to my children’s happiness : Previous to the invitation we received from Lord A—, you felt yourself delighted and contented with your own fortune, lo much superior to any thing you could expect, and more than suffi¬ cient, believe me, my love, to supply you with the necessaries of life, in an elegant ssyle, with economy, and for superfluities, to which you have never been accustomed, I hope my children will never sigh, or wish to contract obligations for favors they cannot want.” I fee no obligations in the cafe, said Miss W oodville sullenly, my Lord’s offers were never intended .as such, and I dare say he is exceedingly offended at your refusal of them 5 for, though we have not " been accustomed” to
to live splendidly, ’tis plain we were born to do so, and if you, Madam, had not lived in that style, your children need not, perhaps, want to receive favors from those who now enjoy our property.,Fye, Ellen, cried Julia, much agitated ; you know not what you say. Her mother burst into tears. Too much have you said, in¬ deed Ellen, replied she, for my peace; re¬ proach from a child is, of all things, the most insupportable to a parent; but I shall persist in my resolution to preserve both my and your independance whilst I can; one day you may know the value of it, and then you will feel how much you are indebted to me, and how very little I merit your unkind beha¬ viour. She quitted the room overwhelmed with her agitations.,Julia taking her fitter’s hand, my dear Ellen, said she, follow my mother, entreat her pardon for your petulance and ill humour, I know you reproach yourself already, pray follow her and reftore her mind to peace.,Indeed
1S8,ELLEN AND JULIA.,Indeed I shall do no such thing, answered she, I didn’t mean to affront her, but ’tis very provoking, that by her foolish scruples we should be deprived of my Lord’s favors, and such a considerable addition to our income. "You are not in a humour now to hear reason, sifter, replied Julia, and therefore I shall not argue the point; when you have coolly re- fiected on what, has past, I hope you will be perfectly satisfied with our mother’s proceed¬ ings. Miss Woodville left the room without a reply, and strolled into the garden, where, in a few moments, she was joined by Lord A, as little pleased as herself. After the com¬ mon salutations, his Lordship asked her, in a very tender voice, if he had been so unhappy to offend her aiff, as well as her mother. No, indeed, my Lord, she replied, you have not offended me, and I am exceedingly hurt that my mother should be so little sensible of your obliging offers to us. Overjoyed to find her in this opinion, he began, in very warm terms, to express his admiration, and lament the necessity of a separation, which must
must give him eternal disquietude ; in short, he discovered the most passionate fondness for her, and declared, fortune could have no charms for him unless fire shared it with him.,It would be difficult to describe the emo¬ tions of Miss Woodville; surprise, joy, and every passion similar to the delight she felt, was expressed in her countenance: After some hesitation she very freely acknowledged how much she was obliged by his partiality, and declared it should not be her fault if her mo¬ ther was not persuaded to alter her deter¬ mination. In consequence of this, a very un¬ reserved conversation took place, and an agreement to meet every morning in the gar¬ den or grove.,When they separated, the young lady re¬ turned to the house, so pleased and elated with the preceding conversation, and the triumph she had gained over her sister, that when she entered her, mother’s dressing room, where they were sitting at work, joy and sa¬ tisfaction shone in every feature ; unsuspecting,of
of any particular occurrence, Mrs. Wood¬ ville believed what lire wished, and thought Ellen perfectly reconciled to her plan’, in which belief she was confirmed, when her daughter advancing, said, will you forgive me, dear Madam, for being so rude to you this morning ? As you are sensible you was wrong, my dear child, I shall cease to remem¬ ber it, only do me justice in my intentions, which will invariably be for your welfare. Nothing more was said.,Miss Woodville took the first opportunity to retire arid indulge her transports : She was now, in her own opinion, the heroine of a novel—a man of rank and fortune was her lover, her mother was inimical to her wishes, she had a pert sentimental Miss of a sifter, who read her lectures, she was engaged in a delightful intimacy with Lord A—, which she should keep a secret from them until she burst upon them as Lady A—, in all her splendour; then followed a train of charming adventures, going to masquerades, balls, and plays; a toaft every where, all the beaus fol¬ lowing
lowing and admiring her, whilst poor Julia, thought flic exultingly, will pine with envy, and think herself well off to get that, hum drum fellow, Evelyn, and be a country par¬ son’s wise.,With these romantic chimeras she repaired to her toilet, and took uncommon pains with her dress, and being in harmony with herself so much spirit and good humour predomi¬ nated over her features, that she really looked extremely beautiful when they met at the dinner hour. L ord A— scarcely for a mo¬ ment took his eyes from her; Selwyn con¬ fessed he thought her very charming, and her good natures sis.; mistaking her care in dress and complacency of manners as a com¬ pliment to her mother, that the might prove her acquiescence to her will, beheld her with pleasure and affection.,Mils Woodville, however, not yet an adept in the art ot disguising her feelings altoge¬ ther, threw such glances now and then at Lord A—, as caught the attention of Mr. Selwyn,,who
who being no novice in such affairs, soon perceived there was a greater degree of inti¬ macy between them than was generally un¬ derstood by the family; in consequence of this observation he resolved to look sharply after them, for he knew my Lord’s fondness for women, and law rather too much levity in the young lady, which he judged proceeded more from her ignorance of the world than a bad heart. Two or three days pasted on very pleasantly on all stdes, when one day as they were all assembled in the drawing room, a servant delivered a letter to Mrs. Woodville, she looked at the post mark and superscription ; from our worthy friend, Eve¬ lyn, said she, and rising withdrew to the win¬ dow to examine the contents.,The moment she mentioned Evelyn Lord A— started, Julia, who was seated opposite to him, observed his emotion, and instantly recoiled!ing a similar surprise at Woodland Castle in Evelyn, when his Lordship was named, she thought it odd, but for the pre¬ sent she suppressed her curiosity, and earnestly enquired
enquired after their friend. He is well and happy, answered^ Mrs. Woodville, for his mother is with him ; good young man, with what respect and affection he dwells on her praises : The strongest proof to me of a good heart is filial affection ; but indeed he is a worthy creature. He is indeed, replied Julia, ’tis hard that merit and talents like his should be so slenderly provided for.,Slenderly, repeated Lord A—, recovering from his first emotion, pray what is your Mr. Evelyn ? I knew a family of that name in Hampshire. O, cried Ellen, ’tis the very fame, I recollect his saying he had a flight knowledge of your Lordship. Indeed, re¬ plied Lord A—, is he a clergyman? Yes, answered fire, a poor Cumberland Curate, that serves two churches, sixteen miles dis¬ tant from each other, at five and forty pounds a year. I have been very much mis¬ informed then, said his Lordship, I understood he had two good livings ; but pray did he talk of me? No, my Lord, replied Julia, your name was accidentally mentioned before.,vol. i. K him.
him, as heir to Woodville Hall, and he said he had once (lightly known you, and advised my fitter to write to your Lordship, which I think was the only time he named you at all. Aye, added Ellen, I recollect how he stared when Lord A—’s name was repeated as heir to the estate; I believe he’s a good young man enough, but to be sure ’tis a hor¬ rid place where he is buried. Yes, said Mrs. "Woodville, with a figh, at the recollection of past scenes, the country is dreary and deso¬ late enough,would to God I had any interest to procure him a better situation. What interest I can boast ost Madam, said his Lordship, is at your service, independent of the pleasure I should feel in serving a young man whose fa¬ mily I was well acquainted with. O, my dear Lord A—, cried Julia, in a livelier tone than usual, ’tis the very thing I wished to alk of you, to serve poor Evelyn: But, dear Madam, what does he fay of our old friends ? Sarah Mills, answered she, is in a very poor state of health, she has drooped ever since our departure, and daily wishes to join her dear
dear Mistress in heaven; the others are very well.,The conversation here took a different turn. Lord A— was pleased with the discre¬ tion of Evelyn, and having long since ceased to feel any dislike to the family, he resolved, as a compliment to Mrs. Woodville, to ex¬ ert all his interest to procure him a good living.,In the evening of the fame day Mr. Selwyn accidentally mentioned the beauties ofDevon- fhire, as affording a greater variety of charm¬ ing views than any other County in England. I have often heard so, said Mrs. Woodville, methinks I should like to go there, I wish for a pleasant and a lively situation to reside in. What, my dear Madam, cried Lord A— above two hundred miles from the capital ? What have we to do with the capital, an¬ swered she, smiling; I intend my girls for good wives, not fine ladies, and I well know in London they have little chance of a handsome establishment, such as their n erit,K L and
and moderate fortunes may procure for them in the country. And should you, my sweet cousin, said Lord A—, addressing Ellen, should you like to be the wife of a country ’squire ? O, horrid ! cried she, not I, indeed. I will never settle in the - count, y, I am sick enough of such scenes, and if my mother will not reside here, the only tolerable place I have seen, I hope she will take us to London, where we may see a little of the world.,Mrs. Woodville was about to reply when a servant entered, and told his Lo rd lb ip, that Lord Meanwell, with Sir Thomas and Lady Booty, were at the gate, having had their car¬ riage broken down, about two miles off, and not to be repaired that night, on enquiring for the nearest accommodation they had been directed to Woodville-Hall. Without giv¬ ing the servant time to finish his story. Lord A—, well acquainted with Lord Meanwell, flew out to receive his guests, who were agree¬ ably surprised at .finding him the master of the mansion. His Lordship soon returned and introduced them to his friends : If Lord,Meanwcll
Meanwell was charmed with the fight of two such lovely girls. Lady Booty, quite a young and fashionable Lady of the ton, was asto¬ nished at the strange appearance they made in their own fancy dresses; her first emotion was to laugh aloud, but, correcting her self j from the respectability of Mrs. Woodville’s air, and the modest elegance of the young ladies, she received their compliments with much politeness, and congratulated herself that an accident which at first wore such a horrid complexion, had procured for her so much unexpected pleasure, and such delight¬ ful company : With great volubility site gave an account of their rambles for. a week past, described some persons they had met with in the most ludicrous terms, ahd so much en¬ grossed the attention of the company, that Ellen and Julia sunk into meer insignificance, and had only the eyes of the gentlemen to remind them of being present.,Lord Meanwell was about thirty, not hand¬ some but very much the air of a man of fa- shion, with so much elegance and softness in,K 3 his
i^8 ELLEN AND JULIA.,his manners as never failed to please—an ex- presiive pair of eyes, good teeth, and a coun¬ tenance of much sensibility, procured him, al¬ most at first fight general approbation; he was not married, rather of a gay turn, and at pteient the humble slave of Lady Booty. Sir Thomas, her husband, was a man of a con¬ siderable estate in the North of England, who had lived single until a good way on the wrong fide of fifty, he then took it into his head to marry a young woman of nineteen, of a good family indeed, but without a shil¬ ling, she being the youngest but two of ten children, and the small estate her father pos¬ sessed being entailed on the eldest son; con¬ sequently the offer Sir Thomas Booty made required but little deliberation, the young lady made no objection to his age or figure, a splendid establishment was the sum of her wishes, and the disproportionate marriage soon took place. He carried her to London and being a very pretty woman, and a new face, she was generally admired. Lord Mean- well, who had a slight family connexion with,Sir
Sir Thomas, devoted himself particularly to her, and they had been on a party through different countries together, when the acci¬ dent of their chaise breaking down brought them to Woodville-Hall, which they knew not then had faller, to Lord A—. Sir Tho¬ mas, easy and good natured, was flattered by the admiration his Lady obtained, nor had he the least of that troublesome passion called jealousy, which renders some married pairs so miserable. Lady Booty was gay to excess, she followed every fashion, partook of every amusement, and being handsome, was conse¬ quently pretty freely censured, how far she deserved it may appear hereafter.,In the course of the evening Lady Booty had pretty well exhausted her own spirits and the patience of her auditors; the young ladies astonished by her volubility and effrontery among entire strangers, looked upon her as a phenomenon, a being they had no idea of; for Ellen, who had a great deal of natural vivacity, and was occasionally rather pert in her replies, to her mother and. sifter, was so,K 4 overawed
overawed by this very gay Lady, as to be in¬ capable of jpeaking a word. Mrs. Woodville, although foe had been so many years secluded from society, retained too strongly the re¬ membrance of the fashionable world, to feel much surprise at the boldness and superiority of manners this lady assumed j when, there¬ fore, she grew tired, Mrs. Woodville joined in a general conversation, and from the respect Lord A— and Mr. -Selwyn paid to her and her daughter*, Lady Booty began to consider them with more attention 3 she saw plainly an air of elegance and fashion in the girls that ill. accorded with the rusticity and strange make of their cloaths, yet she could not help thinking there was something becoming in them, at the same time their appearance in public would subject them to ridicule : She thought Ellen very beautiful, and. from the cast of her features believed her to be lively and similar to her own disposition, she watch¬ ed her eyes, and from the direction of them and a reciprocal return, soon discovered the secret between her and Lord A—. When,she
she examined J Lilian it was with a scrutinizing eye to discover her temper ; there was a mo¬ dest reserve, with a sweetness of manners in her deportment, that convinced Lady Booty the elegance of her person was the least of her charms, she even felt an awe when ad¬ dressing her, that she blushed to feel for so young and so inferior a young woman. She directly attached herself to Ellen, from whole more lively manners she expected to derive most entertainment to herself.,Very soon after their entrance Lord A— had told them, that accident, having driven them to his house, he hoped pleasure .to him¬ self and friends would detain them there for some days; an invitation Lady Booty very freely accepted. The society being enlarged,, grew exceeding cheerful, but was by no means, equally agreeable to all parties. Mrs. Wood¬ ville saw enough into the character of Lady-. Booty to convince her she was not a de si rab¬ ble acquaintance for her daughters: A lovely young woman; thought she, as she viewed her, to sacrifice herself to a man almost,k5,three.
three times her age, must have but little sen¬ sibility and less delicacy; she is too volatile to be a friend, and in such a preference evin¬ ces her motives too plainly to be misunder¬ stood. A woman, who cannot love her hus¬ band, is in a situation of all others the most dangerous, I shall therefore lose no time in seeking for a situation that may remove my family from hence.,Such were the ideas that struck Mrs. Woodville though very different ones occu¬ pied the thoughts of others. Lord Meanwell, who had heedfully examined the party, after surveying Miss Woodville, and acknowledg¬ ing she was a beautiful girl, his eyes dwelt on Julia, Hie was to him a new character; not a beauty indeed, but a something so love¬ ly, so interesting in her face, a delicacy, a sen¬ sibility in her countenance, not to be de¬ scribed; and an elegance of manners which spoke good fense and good nature, that in¬ voluntarily his eyes were fixed on her face, and his heart, paid hemage to charms that ra¬ ther retired than seemed to covet admiration.,When
ELLEN AND JULIA',■•1Iil‘'..,203 ,,When they separated for the evening, and Mrs. Woodville with her daughters retired to their apartment, she asked them with a smile, what they thought of Lady Booty. O, cried Ellen, she is a most charming woman,. I admire her exceedingly; I think it a most fortunate accident that brought her here 3 I was at first rather afraid of her, but now I like her of all things. And you, Julia, asked Mrs. Woodville, are you of the fame opinion with your sister? Not exactly, Madam, an¬ swered she, I think Lady Booty a very hand¬ some woman, but she has rather, I think, too much freedom of manners, she stares one out of countenance,, she seems to look into your heart at first sight,. and then her con¬ versation is so very unreserved and gay, that I felt myself often confused, though I really did not always understand her meaning : In short, she seems a person that might amuse one," but such as your heart could never challenge as a friend;,I rejoice to hear you fay so, my dear Julia,, answered her mother, there are many such.,K 6, characters
104 ELLEN AND JULIA.,characters as Lady Booty in the world, hun¬ dreds who are pleasing and specious, but they are not respectable. I think her much to blame, said Miss Woodville, for marrying such an old fellow. She had her motives for so doing, doubtless, answered her mother, how far they may be justifiable is not for us to enquire : But do you know, added she, that I entertairt a very great esteem for a character but little noticed by either of you, that is Mr. Selwyn. A formal, sententious fellow, I think, said Ellen; he is polite to be sure, but is always so grave, however he is not very young and therefore gravity in him may be excusable. And pray, replied her mother, what difference do you think there may be between his age and Lord A—’s ? Lord, Madam, cried Ike, blushing at the name, many years, certainly. I believe to . the contrary, replied Mrs. Woodville, fixing her eyes on her face x but, however, that is of little consequence, I believe Mr. Selwyn to be a very worthy man, he talks of adver¬ tising fox a house, I. shall do the same, and should.
should not be sorry if we can settle in the same neighbourhood. No reply being made, and their mother being undressed, the sifters retired to their room, which they had scarcely entered before Ellen burst into a violent fit of laughing—What a high joke it would be, cried she, if our good mother should have fallen in love with the grave Mr. Selwyn. Fye, my dear, said Julia, pray don,'’'t enter¬ tain such an absurd idea, I am persuaded my mother thinks of him only as a friend ; but tell me, Ellen, how you like Lord Mean¬ well? O, exceedingly, replied she, but I think he is very fond of Lady Booty. Of Lady Booty ! said her sifter, why she is mar- z ried I And suppose she is, retorted the other, is that a reason why she should not be admired ? Have not we heard and read of many married women who have as many lovers as unmarried ones ? I hope, answered. Julia, those instances happen but seldom, for I think such conduct very inexcusable. The other only laughed and the subject dropped.,The
The following morning Miss Woodville according to her custom for some days past, went into the garden to meet Lord A—, who was waiting for her, and to whom she com¬ municated her mother’s intention of adver- tifing for a’house. Heavens I my charming Ellen, cried he, how cruel is her design, why cannot you persuade her to go to London ? Ah ! said she, that is impossible, I am sure. An excellent idea has struck me,, exclaimed, he, I dare say I can persuade Lady Booty to invite you to spend the winter with her in town. That would indeed be delightful, said slie, but who can prevail on my mother to let me go ? We will consider of that, an¬ swered he, something must be thought on, for I cannot live to be separated from you. A sudden impulse made Ellen cry out, is there a necessity for that, does your Lordship think my mother would object: to your addresses ? Indeed,Ido, replied he, very much confused,, for some particular reasons which I will ex¬ plain another time; at present we must con¬ trive to make Lady Booty our friend.,' They
They proceeded on to the grove, their usual walk, but the forgoing conversation was overheard by Mrs. Woodville, to her infinite distress. Some observations she had made for two or three days past, and the regular walk of Eilen every morning alone reduced her to the painful necessity of tracing her steps, and concealing herself to hear their conversation. What such a mother as Mrs. Woodville must feel may be easily guessed: she took her resolution immediately, fire de¬ tested duplicity, and found it impossible to behave decently towards Lord A—, whilst she conceived he had unworthy designs on her child: She returned to her dressing-room under the most painful anxiety, and found Julia impatiently expecting her. My dear mo¬ ther, said she, Lady Booty has sent to request we will take an airing with her in my Lord’s carriage, is it agreeable to you, and do you know where my sister is ? In the garden I believe, replied Mrs. Woodville faintly, let Sally seek for her, and you may both go if you please'. In fact, site was glad of an op¬ portunity,5
portun'"-¬,#’*'ty to have an interview with his Lord¬ ship, and therefore bid the servant, who was. going for Ellen, to tell Lord A—, foe wished for the favor of meeting him in the library, when the ladies were gone out. This mes¬ sage was delivered to him before Ellen, they both supposed it was to consult him about her future residence, and he cried, exultingly,. you shall see the foccess of my eloquence, I have scarcely ever failed to carry a point my heart was set upon, and although your mo¬ ther has once baffled me, I may be conqueror at last. She nodded her head, with a smile, and was soon ready to attend Lady Booty..,When the carriage drove down the avenue Mrs. Woodville, with an agitated, heart en¬ tered the library, his Lordship was already there, he was struck with the solemnity of her air, but handing her to a. chair with, great politeness, professed himself happy to obey her commands. My Lord, laid foe, I will not keep you in fufpence, I must be ex¬ plicit at once; know then, I was this morn¬ ing. a. painful witness of your conversation with,Miss-
Miss Woodville, what my sentiments are you can be at no loss to judge, and what repa¬ ration you can make for seducing the mind of my child from the duty Are owes to her mother’s will, and being brought, after a life of innocence and candour, to the subterfuge of duplicity, unworthy of herself and me, I leave for your Lordship to determine. Me you have irreparably injured, you have de- ftroyed all confidence between me and my daughter; you have obliterated every senti¬ ment of friendship and respect I until this day believed due to your character, and you com¬ pel me to a deceit that may account for my abrupt departure from Woodville-Hall to¬ morrow morning. After what has past ’tis scarcely necessary to add, I receive no further favors from Lord A—, and that henceforth we must be strangers.,Without waiting for a reply, which, in truth, at that moment, from his surprise and confusion he was unable to make; she hastily quitted the room, and met Mr. Selwyn in the gallery, he took notice of her agitations and
and hoped she was not. ill. A little discon¬ certed, said flic, trying to recover herself at being obliged to leave you to-morrow : In¬ deed, cried he, with visible concern, when fee¬ ing her ready to faint, you are ill, laid he, pray permit me to conduct you to your apart¬ ment; she accepted, his offered arm, and the instant she entered her room a friendly burst of tears preserved her from fainting; Mr. Selwyn, with an air of candour and affection besought her to be composed. I know not, Madam, the cause of your emotions, but if they arise from any occurrence wherein I can be of service I beseech you to believe it will afford me particular pleasure to obey your commands. Your kindness effects me fen* fibly, Sir, answered she, and I will prove the estimation I hold your friendly offers in, by accepting them. I wish to quit this house immediately, yet am so unfortunately situated I know not where to go for a short time until I can fix on my future plan; can you recommend me to any tolerable agreeable village at some distance from hence ? I be¬ lieve
lieve I can. Madam, replied he, as it is only for a temporary residence, at Swindon, in Wiltshire, I have an estate, ’tis on the skirts of the village, a large old family mansion, in¬ habited by a worthy farmer and his wife, used to afford rhe very decent apartments when I chose an excursion for a few weeks in the country; the furniture is decent and clean, there you may be accommodated in a plain rural stile, but with the highest good will and attention: I have written to the good folks to expect me, but my Lord insists upon my staying here until I meet with a more eligible situation. O, cried Mrs. Woodville, ’tis the most desirable place in the world for a few weeks, but one favor more, Sir, I have to request, which is, that you will not mention a word of my intention, nor the name of the village I am going to, either to my Lord A— or any of this family. Depend upon my ho¬ nor, Madam, answered he, that I will not: But will you pardon my curiosity, if I own, your leaving this house, and his Lordship, without acquainting him of your destination.,greatly
greatly surprises me. Your curiosity is very natural, but, said she, at present particular reasons forbid me from being communicative, should I have the pleasure of seeing you at the farmer’s, I will be more unreserved ; believe, ’till then, that I am justified in my present in¬ tentions, and if you will write immediately that I may not come unexpectedly upon the good people, and contrive to draw my Lord out to-morrow, for two or three hours, a different road from the one I must pursue, I shall be still farther obliged to you. What hour do you suppose most likely you can take an airing? About twelve, answered Selwyn,, is our usual hour, and I will certainly find a pretence to get him out. Some other little matters were regulated between them, and when he left her, Mrs. Woodville rejoiced to find she had not been deceived in her opi¬ nion of Mr. Selwyn, at the fame time that (lie had but little cause to depend on the sin¬ cerity or integrity of mankind. She next called her servant Thomas, and confiding in his secrecy, ordered him to get a carriage ready
ready at Woodville-Hall between twelve and one next day, and having concerted every thing necessary, (lie endeavoured to compose her spirits against her daughters’ return.,In the mean time Lord A— sat for some time fixed to his seat under the most painful and mortifying reflections he had ever expe¬ rienced; the despicable opinion Mrs. Wood¬ ville must entertain of his principles, the calm contempt she express, her resolution to leave his house, and all his schemes exposed and blown into air: In short, the more he reflected, the more he despised himself and felt the disgraceful figure he must make at his own table, in the presence of those whom he had intended to injure. That very morn¬ ing he had received the gift of a living for Mr. Evelyn, in Kent, worth upwards of three hundred a year, he had intended to present it to Mrs. Woedville, for her friend, and an¬ ticipated her pleasure and gratitude ; now he dared not do it, it would look like a com¬ promise, it would be an insult on her feelings, and she would, doubtless, refuse it. He there¬ fore
fore wrote Evelyn himself, and enclosed a fifty pound note for defraying his expences to town.,After considering on his situation for above three hours, he was entirely irresolute how to proceed—marriage he detested, nor was Mils Woodville estimable enough, in his opinion, to justify an alteration in his sentiments; she had /hewn too much levity to entitle her to his respect:, and her little consideration for her mother gave but small promise of duty and attention to a husband.,Distracted with various emotions, and per¬ fectly unsettled when the dinner bell rung, he prepared to meet his guests with a very per¬ turbed mind. On entering the room he slightly glanced his eyes on Miss Woodville, and was convinced, from the ease of her ap¬ pearance, she was, as yet, a stranger to the business of the morning. He offered his hand as usual, to conduct Mrs. Woodville to the head of the table, though with evident con¬ fusion, she accepted it, and placed herself with her
her accustomed politeness. Lady Booty was in high spirits, Ihe communicated some share of it to those around her. Lord A— and Mr. Selwyn were least entertaining, though the former endeavoured to rally his spirits but it was awkwardly done, and Selwyn, who was an attentive observer, saw from his beha¬ viour and constrained manner to Mrs. and Miss Woodville some disagreeable occur- xences had happened between them.,When they had withdrawn from the din¬ ner room, Lady Booty began to plan some pleasurable excursions for three or four ensu¬ ing days, and flattered herself Mrs. Wood- ville and the young ladies would approve of them. We should certainly be happy to wait on you, Madam, answered she, with a hesi¬ tation, that proved how painful the attempt of imposition was to a mind of rectitude, but I have this day received an account of some business which will oblige me to leave Wood¬ ville-Hall within two or three days, and until my departure I shall have some affairs to fettle which will take" up much of my time.,. Never
Never was greater consternation than this answer occasioned : Ellen was thunderstruck, she opened her mouth once or twice to speak, unable to utter a syllable; she looked at Lord A—, he was playing with his watch key, greatly confused 5 Julia was the first to speak. My dear Madam, I hope no disagreeable news ?• Nothing, my love, that will prove disagreeable I hope, but, to prevent its being so, renders it necessary we should undertake a journey. God forbid ! cried Ellen, we should be going to return into the wilds of Cumberland. You need not be apprehensive of that, I have no such intention, but pray let the subject drop. Indeed, Madam, said Lord Meanwell, you have annihilated all our hopes of pleasure, and the very circumstance which last night I considered as the most fortunate of my life, is likely to prove a source of eternal regret, if we are to be deprived of the enlivening presence of these young ladies. Your Lordship is extremely polite, said Lady Booty, with a haughty toss of her head, to the rest of the company, if all your pleasures are
are annihilated. Well, well, cried Sir Tho¬ mas, don’t let us spoil out present satisfaction, but since we are to be so unfortunate, endea¬ vour to enjoy their company whilst we have them with us, and being a gloomy evening, suppose we make a party at Vingt-une. This proposal was readily agreed to, and the com - pany appeased tolerably composed again, all except Ellen and Julia, the former from vex¬ ation, the latter from an apprehension of un¬ easiness, could not regain their cheerfulness for the evening.,When, at night, they withdrew to their apartments, Mrs. Woodville, to suppress all curiosity, said, very mildly, don’t be the least uneasy, my children, my going from hence will be productive of no trouble to us, on the contrary, I hope the journey will turn out very agreeable. Where are we going to, then, asked Ellen, sullenly. I intend to sur¬ prise you, answered Mrs. Woodville, trying to smile, and therefore you will excuse me from telling you at present. All places are alike to me, cried Julia, with vivacity, if my vol. i. L mother
4i3 ELLEN AND JULIA.,mother and fitter are with me, and blett with health and content. And when, said her fitter, are we to set off, Madam? Within three days, I think, replied her mother, and therefore to-morrow morning pray begin packing up the unnecessary part of your ward¬ robe. That’s soon done, said the other, spite - fully, being in mourning we have not much variety, and Lady Booty says, we shall be laughed out of countenance if we go into any genteel company with cloaths made as ours are; she said she was ready to expire With stifling her mirth, when die first saw us. And I am sure, exclaimed Julia, I am always thrown into confusion when I see the gentle¬ men scrutinizing her dress, which, however fashionable, is, in my opinion, very indelicate. Her sister smiled with disdain at her want of taste, but made no reply, and when they re¬ tired to their own room, was too much en¬ gaged with her own reflections to enter into any conversation.,The succeeding morning they rose early, Julia employed herself in assisting the servant to
to fettle their trunks, whilst Ellen stole off into the garden, in the hope of meeting with Lord A—, though not with any great expectation of her hopes being realized; fortune or chance however, seconded her wishes, for at the bot¬ tom of the walk, thrown on a garden chair, lay his Lordship, who, starting up, caught her hand, and hurried her away into a small tem¬ ple at a little distance, without speaking a word until she was seated; he then, with every expression of vexation related what had passed the preceding day : Never was sur¬ prise equal to Miss Woodville’s, her mo¬ ther’s silence, (her duplicity she called it) on the subject, her sudden intention of leaving the Hall, and the discovery she had made, of her sentiments, altogether overcame her with astonishment and mortification. I know, not, said she, whither she means to carry me, nor do I know by what authority she con¬ trols me; she cannot deprive me of my for- - tune, and ’tis hard I should be a slave to her caprice ; I dare say she means to bury us in some forlorn place, where nobody may find us.,L 2,Lord
Lord A— feeing her in this humour, said every thing to aggravate it; painted the de¬ lights she would have met with in London in the most glowing colours ; but, during his long description, she had began to reflect, and ask herself, why my Lord had not owned his affection for her to her mother. Ab¬ ruptly interrupting him, but pray, my Lord, if you design to marry me, why will you suffer my mother to take me away ? Struck by a question which he could not evade, he was for a moment silent, but recovering himself, my dear Miss Woodville, I will be explicit,, I will throw myself on your candour and ge¬ nerosity, and trust to its decision. From my youth I ever had an invincible repugnance to marriage; the very few if any happy wedded pairs, which we either see or hear of, has confirmed that repugnance: I wish to unite myself to some generous female, who has firmness enough to despise the little narrow notions which prevail among persons of shallow understandings, I wish to have no tic but love, no bond but inclination, then it will be
be our mutual interest to make each other happy, we shall find a delight in so doing, because we are free: Whereas, bound to each other by vows we are not at liberty to break, the impatient spirit which scorns to be fettered, will rattle its chains, and if they cannot be broken will loon detest the object that confines it. These are my sentiments, I will not deceive you ; ’tis in your power to make me the happiest of men, the most adoring grateful lover and friend, but I never will be a husband.,It would be next to an impossibility to des¬ cribe the various emotions that agitated Mils Woodville during the utterance of this vile sophistry. She could not recall any thing like this scene in any of her favorite novels. — " Such an open avowal of free principles was entirely unprecedented; hundreds held the fame opinions, but they dared not express them; yet, certainly there was much candor in his Lordfhjp’s behaviour, he did not seek to deceive her, and a man of so much honor,L 3 in
in that instance, would be equally tenacious in every other.,Whilst these ideas were floating on the mind of Ellen, and my Lord was urging her to a reply, the door opened, and Mr. Sel¬ wyn appeared; he started back and stam¬ mered out an apology; they, equally con¬ fused, attempted in vain to speak, when as Selwyn was retreating from the door, he cried out hastily, " I fee Mrs. Woodville coming down the walk.” They both sprung to the door, joined him, and inexpressibly hurried, met her half way, my Lord bowed and walked on. You are in the garden early this morning, Ellen, I thought I requested you to be otherwise employed. Yes, yes. Madam, answered she, hesitatingly, but my sifter and the servant undertook to pack the trunks. Mrs. Woodville, without deigning a reply, turned to the house, conversing with Mr. Selwyn, whom she reminded softly, " twelve is the hour.” He bowed and chat¬ ted on indifferent things until they reached the house, the ladies went to their apartment,,Ellen
Ellen expected a terrible lecture, not a word was said, and soon after they attended the break.faH table.,Lady Booty proposed a long airing, which was alien ted to by all the gentlemen, Mrs. "Woodville apologized for the non-attendance of herself and daughters on that morning, as they would be particularly engaged. The company regretted, Ellen pouted, not doubt¬ ing but the denial was designed to vex her. After breakfast, the horses being ordered, Mrs. Woodville retired to her room with the young ladies, whom she kept employed in putting up little trifles, while the servant compleated every thing ready for their jour¬ ney in their apartment.,Nearly about twelve she saw the whole party gallop down the avenue, and in less than a quarter of an hour after a carriage drove up; here is company coming, said Ellen. We will go down to receive them then, said Mrs. Woodville, she noded to the girl, who understood her, and accompanied,L4 by
SU4,ELLEN AN D JULIA.,by her daughters went down to the hall, where her own servant and my Lord’s were fastening their trunks behind the coach, What is this for, cried Ellen ? Don’t expose your¬ self before the servants, said her mother softly, this carriage is for us, and I defire you will get in. Good lord, Madam, said Julia, are we to go without taking leave of our friends ? Is not that already done? answered her mo¬ ther, hastily j get in, child, all is ready. She took Ellen by the hand and rather dragged than led her to the coach door, she got in almost unknowing what flic did, but when her sifter and mother were seated, and the carri¬ age about to move, ihe threw her head out of the window, tell my Lord A—, cried she, that I am carried off by force; she had time for no more, the horses flew on full gallop, she burst into tears, her mother looked ex¬ ceedingly displeased, and Julia lat in filent astonishment, unable to comprehend what all this meant. Not a word was spoke for seve¬ ral miles, at length Mrs. Woodville said, to ypu, Julia, my conduct this day may appear,very
lllen and Julia. --5,very extraordinary, but I refer you to your fitter for an explanation of it, she is at no loss to guess at my motives, I hope you have not loft her confidence, though she has excluded her mother from it; however, let your curi- ofity be suspended until night, for unless the communication is voluntarily made, I do not with to be present. No answer was returned, Ellen* dried her tears, and remained silent throughout the journey.,CHAP. XIII.,1ITE will now look back to the inhabi-,’ ’ tants of Woodland Cattle. Mr. Eve¬ lyn, after the departure of the family, found a change of refidence, an increase in his for¬ tune, the hope of seeing his mother, and all other additional comforts he possessed, in-,L 5 sufficient
sufficient to procure peace of mind j the image of the young and charming Julia perpetually haunted his imagination. She is much too young yet, cried he, to be addressed for a wife: But what then ? Many, like myself, mutt be captivated by her opening perfections, and, like me, would be contented to wait for years, if sure of gaining such a treasure ! Hopes I have none, why then indulge useless regret, and neglect to enjoy the good I possess ? the beneficence of that family has given me the power of relieving many of the poor inhabi¬ tants round this neighbourhood, let me, then, by active benevolence, assist those, whom for¬ merly I could only sooth by compassion and advice. He pursued his intention, and visited the wretched cottages of the sick and poor, diffused his bounty where it was wanted, and was overpaid in the blessings of the grateful heart.,In a few days his mother arrived, their - mutual .transports on meeting, after so long an absence were very great, but when she men¬ tioned the present she had received frorp.an.,unknown
unknown hand, he instantly recognized the same generous spirit that had so kindly assist¬ ed him. Ah 1 my dear Madam, said he, I have loft the company of the most charming family in the world, to whom I am indebted for the happiness of feeing you in this dreary place, as the only consolation I could receive under so-great a misfortune. Mrs. Evelyn joined with warmth in the praises due to their amiable friends, site exerted herself in attentions to old Anthony, and seldom passed a day without seeing Sarah and Jane, when a letter arrived from Mrs. Woodville, which afforded them the delight of hearing they were all well and happy at Woodville-Hall: disposed as line was to think unfavorably of Eord A—, her prejudices gave way, when ilie heard of his noble condudt towards her. benefadtrefs..,Juft at this time old Sarah began to droop,. there was no particular disorder, but an in¬ creasing weakness, indicative of a general de¬ cay, and in less than three days after Mr. Evelyn answered the letter the. faithful .crea-,L.6,ture
ture slept away in her chair after dinner; poor Jane, excessively frightened, hastened to the Castle, Mr. Evelyn accompanied her back, and found indeed that all was over. She had left a paper in her box, bequeathing all she left to Mr. Evelyn, dated about a fort¬ night previous to her death. He did not chuse to avail himself of the poor woman's kindness, but, taking a faithful inventory of every thing, wrote to Mr. Fitzmaurice for orders relative to her property. He buried her decently, and took Jane home to the Caf¬ tle, where his mother treated her with the utmost kindness.,Evelyn was accustomed to spend his soli¬ tary hours in rambling among the rocks and in thy rui^v of tire old Abbey, where he in¬ dulged " meditation ever) to madness.',1Iilfs<>*1’ One morning after traversing the cioysters, and going through them to a distant part of the building, he seated himself on a stone kind of bench, that through an opening commanded a distant prospect of the sea: Contemplating that uncertain element, with much emotion,,Ah!
Ah! cried he aloud, such are the fleeting joys of life ; to-day in possession of our willies, flattered by hope, and indulging visionary . schemes of happiness, when on the morrow, a black cloud, a tempestuous wind obscures the brightning ray, and^daihes all our pros¬ pects of felicity into eternal night! A deep sigh, or rather groan, that seemed to isue from some person very near him, caused him to start up, and looking round he saw an elderly but respectable looking man, leaning on a stick at the entrance of a small door which was near him, but which he had not noticed; he saluted him, and the man advanced slowly, surveying him with an eye of eager curiosity, he bowed and made a motion for him to re¬ sume his seat, taking his place by him.,You will forgive me, my son, if chance not curiosity has made me an intruder; the voice of sorrow reached my ears, it vibrated to my heart, and caused me to open the door of my retreat; I grieve to. fee one so young capable of reflections, which seem to spring from a wounded spirit; heaven forbid you should
«3Or EL E■•',’‘ 'EN A N D JUL I A.,should be already acquainted with misery. —• Alas! Sir, answered Evelyn, I fear neither age or situations are exemptions from cala¬ mities and the evils of life; perhaps, hun¬ dreds, placed as I am, could derive comfort, if not pleasure,, to themselves, in my situation.. I rejoice to hear you fay so, replied the gen¬ tleman, then I hope the exclamations which attracted my attention were general observa¬ tions rather than, the effusions of an uneasy mind. No, Sir, answered Evelyn, they sprung from my own feelings;. for though, my days have not been marked .out by pe¬ culiar distresses,, yet I have felt the loss of a. parent, the destruction.of my hopes and ex- pectations in the profession I was bred to, the mortification of feeing, a mother reduced to . a scanty provision, and lately a disappoint¬ ment in the only view 1 could form to myself of happiness in this life. Poor youth, saidk1Iilt‘*'1 the other, with an emphatic sigh, your lot seems hard indeed, but do not despair, you may yet look forward with hope; deserve to be happy and you will be so, for you have not yet formed those connexions that entwine.,about
about the heart: if the disappointment you complain of is of the tender kind, be thank¬ ful to heaven you have not loft a wife, a child,, loft them by your own folly, and brought on yourself everlasting remorse.,Here he arose and walked about the cloy- fter in great emotion, the other, too much respected his sorrows to interrupt them, and. in a few minutes [he returned to his feat: Looking earnestly oh Evelyn, do you live in this neighbourhood? Are you a clergyman ? I am a clergyman, he replied, and live at Woodland Castle. At Woodland Castle, ex¬ claimed the old man, I heard a London gen¬ tleman had bought that estate, are you the person ? I am not, replied Evelyn, that gen¬ tleman is dead, his family have left the coun¬ try, and at their request I reside in the house with my mother. The stranger paused some time, then turning to him again, how comes it I never saw you here before, this abbey,, its ruins and environs I visit daily, is it the first; time of your coming here? To this part of the Abbey it is, answered. Evelyn, the other
other s.de, the hill, the rocks and woods I fre¬ quently walk to. And you are a clergyman? said he again abruptly. " Yes, can I be of any service to your" No, cried he hastily, man can do me no service, and you are the only one I have spoken to these many years, but there is something ingenuous in your coun¬ tenance, something congenial in your sor¬ rows, something in your voice which pierced my heart, and made it expand towards you; meet me to morrow at this hour, I shall then consider whether I may again trust man, or depend upon that feeble judgment, of which I have so dearly proved the fallibility—if I do not appear make no enquiries, respect my motives, and forget you have seen me. With a deep sigh followed by the eyes of Evelyn, he re-entered the door and threw it fait after him.,What a strange adventure, thought Evelyn, how often have I ridiculed the poor boors round the village, for their tales of people or ghosts, inhabiting this heap of ruins, yet Mrs. Danvers and this man prove I was,4 wrong
wrong. Ah ! what various scenes of com¬ parative misery may be enclosed in the rocks, or concealed in this ruinous building I No where, indeed, could misery fly to indulge its sorrows more secret, than in this gloomy place and desolate neighbourhood. Over¬ whelmed with painful reflections he walked flowly home, and endeavoured to a flume a cheerful look before his mother, but he could not so well disguise his feelings but that she saw he was ill at ease, yet, allowing for a situation so very retired and melancholy for a young man, she avoided taking notice of his depres¬ sion, and sought to amuse his mind.,The succeeding morning he hastened to . th$ Abbey, resumed his former feat, and waited impatiently for the appearance of the old gentleman: It was some time beyond the hour when the door opened and he came flowly towards him. You fee I have kept my appointment, I can hardly account for my prepossession in your favor, having been already so much deceived in mankind, I had (hut up my mind against placing any further confidence
confidence in man, and during my long re¬ sidence in this wild place, I have never had a temptation to break my resolution ’till new, I have held no converse but with two wretch¬ ed peasants, who, though poor and illiterate, I have found faithful and honest, for corrup¬ tion has not reached them, nor interest or pleasure tempted them to evil—Happy state of ignorance ! . 1 am but young in the great school of life, replied Evelyn, yet I have lately met with many instances that prove the de¬ pravity of mankind, but God forbid I should harden my heart against my fellow creatures, or believe that depravity to be general; such, ideas revolt against that true philanthropy christians should ever possess. The old man shook his head—You talk well, answered he,, but ’tis the language of a young man un¬ hackneyed in the ways of the world, or of one, who, well acquainted with the arts of duplicity, seeks to impose upon others; you are too young, I hope, to come under the latter description, and therefore I give you credit for your sentiments; and though I,should.
should be sorry to teach you that frigid cau¬ tion, that vile opinion of mankind in general which fits so ill upon youth, yet you will find, by my story, that implicit confidence should be placed in no one, that kis necessary to be¬ lieve we are all frail, all liable to temptation, and subject to error, unless we watch carefully over our own hearts, and judge from the actions, from the constant tenor of a man's conduct, of the rectitude of his principles, and not trust to professions alone, for theory and practice are too often widely opposite.,. My name is of little consequence, my fa¬ ther was a merchant, he had two sons, I am the youngest; my elder brother, when of proper age was sent to Ruflia, in the ’count¬ ing-house of 'a correspondent and partner of my father’s; I remained at home and received every advantage of education a public school could bestow, and also imbibed the disadvan¬ tages that attend an association with young lads of superior fortune, who, unlimited in their expences, or obtaining easy credit, launch into every extravagance and dissipation youth,are
are prone to : My father made me a very handsome allowance, but it was insufficient to keep pace with the expences of my young companions, and seduced by example, I soon had recourse to that folly, or rather vice, of borrowing money constantly before my al¬ lowance became due, which for sometime I regularly discharged, but habits of extrava¬ gance indulged, soon become-¬1Iil,"'‘’*' importunate, and increase daily ; my quarterly remittances were by no means equal to my expences, and therefore I became involved in debt. A son of Lord Welsted’s in the fame predicament with myself proposed railing some money on our joint bond, at a most exorbitant interest you may be sure, and when I objected to the impossibility of my paying it ’till I became of age, when I should have seven hundred pounds, the gift of an aunt, he told me, that as I should be of age sooner than himself, if I would give the bond for fix hundred and forty pounds, the sum demanded for five hundred and twenty, he would give me a counter bond to pay me four hundred, be¬ cause
cause he conceived I ought to be benefited for standing forth in the business. You will readily ask, why not give his own bond at first ? ’Twas a question I ought to have asked myself, but credulous, and ignorant in . such matters, eager to have the money, and glad that an expedient had been found to pro¬ cure it, I abided implicitly by his advice, gave the bond, divided the money, which barely paid my debts, and thought myself perfectly happy.,Near a month had passed and I had heard nothing of the counter bond, when I received a letter from my father, commanding my immediate presence in town, as my mother was in a very alarming state of illness : Being exceedingly fond of my mother, I applied directly for leave to obey the summons, and set off pott for London, without once think¬ ing of my business with the honorable Mr. Welfted. On my arrival the first news was the death of my parent two hours before; I ,1Iil'’' was much afflicted for many days, I wrote Welfted and another good friend, a Mr.,Rayner,
Rayner, a young man of great expectations, a pleasing person, and the most insinuating manners; as J had conceived a real affection for those two young men, and thought our friendship reciprocal, 1 felt no small degree of vexation when my father told me it was not his intention I fliould return to Eaton, as he thought I was now capable of assisting him in the ’counting house. I expressed my surprise at his intention, as I thought the edu¬ cation I had received was more applicable for the bar, or the church, than to be confined to the desk, where such talents were not ne¬ cessary. You have mistaken notions, Erank, replied my father, the character of a British Merchant is respectable every where, and if he is possessed of superior talents to the ge¬ nerality of his companions, he has the power of entertaining his. leisure hours with plea¬ sure to himself, and of giving himself conse¬ quence in the eyes of others. I submitted, but it was with an ill grape, and my first ap¬ plication to business was extremely disagree¬ able to me. My two friends in their letters ridiculed
ridiculed my situation, and boasted that they should soon make the grand tour, whilst poor Frank would be plodding at the desk. I felt the sting most poignantly, and, but for an occurrence that took place just then, should most probably have at that time taken some rash step or other.,A sister of my late mother came to pay us a visit, and brought her daughter with her, whom I had never seen from childhood; she was turned of eighteen, her person lovely, her manners and disposition perfectly amiable. I was struck with her appearance, and in the course of a few days was violently in love with my fair cousin ; the attentions I payed her were very pleasing to my father, nor did she seem averse to them : In short, in less than three weeks after their arrival I was permit¬ ted, with declared approbation, to make my addresses to her: She had six thousand pounds her father left her, besides expectations at the death of her mother—my father offered to make my fortune equivalent, and to take me into partnership, conditionally that we resided,6,with
246 ELLEN AND JULIA.,with him, for as I was not yet twenty, he thought we were too young to be left to our own management, and Mrs. Medway my aunt, could not bear to reside in London, having a younger daughter in the country, who had a very bad slate of health. My fa¬ ther’s conditions were readily subscribed to, and the expiration of six months from my mother’s death was appointed for our mar¬ riage.,I wrote Welfted and Rayner, in raptures, of the happiness I was soon to enjoy, their answers mortified and vexed me. They run on with the most pointed irony on the bless¬ ings of a married life, drew pictures of an uxorious, a hen-peck’d, a contented cornuto, and of a proud, insolent, vain woman, fond of admiration, and giving her husband con¬ sequence from the connexions she would en¬ deavour to form. ’Tis impossible to repeat all they said, nor the strong impressions my mind received from their ill-timed ridicule. I could not divest myself of my passion for Mils Medway, but I scrutinized her every look,
look, word, and action, with a jealous eye, and frequently, as I thought, discovered a va¬ nity and levity in them which was only the effects of cheerful spirits and sweetness of temper.,Several letters passed between myself and friends, during four months, similar to what I have related, and though I stilT loved, yet it was not with that warmth, that esteem and preference, I ought to have felt for the wo¬ man that was to be my wife; but, as .1 was cautious in my behaviour, my indifference: was interpreted into respect, and propriety of conduct. To be short, the day came that was to decide my future fate, I was married, and might have been, but for my own folly, one of the happiest, as I am now one of the most wretched of mankind. My wife had every endearing amiable quality that could adorn a woman j in spite of the prejudices I had imbibed I grew every hour more fond of her; my father doated on her, and, altho’ I now and then received ironical letters from,vol. i. M my
my two friends, their effect: seemed to lose ground every day.,I had been married about eight months, when, by a violent cold, which terminated in a fever of the brain, I lost my worthy fa¬ ther : He had divided his property equally between my brother and self, on his first iil- nest, recommending us to a partnership, as I was not yet one and twenty, and appointing a friend of his, a Mr. Newberry, my trustee, for the few months I wanted being of age. My brother being married and fettled in Russia declined the partnership, and commis¬ sioned an agent to settle all affairs between us; this was soon done, and I found myself possessed of near thirty thousand pounds, and having two worthy men as clerks, I declined all offers of partnership, and depended upon them and myself.,Very foon after this I was most agreeably surprised by the arrival of my two friends; highly delighted, I introduced them to my wile; she received them with politeness and attention;
attention; Welshed was obliged to attend his father, but the old Mr. Rayner residing in Herefordshire, I prevailed on his son to take his bed with me. One of the gentlemen who was in my ’counting house had lately lived with me; for, having no connexions in town, and wishing for an addition to our society after the death of my father, I persuaded him to reside with us ; he was about eight and twenty, had lived with my father four years before I came home, and was very high in his esteem, nor did myself or my wife regard him less.,Welded wa^ with us every day, he brought ■us tickets for every entertainment the town afforded, introduced several of his friends, and soon involved us in a career of pleasure and dissipation, which I grew passionately fond of, and used frequently to spend many days and nights from my amiable wife, who always received me with kindness, without the least interrogation or complaint as to my manner of pasting my time. She had lately shewn signs of pregnancy, which had given me much pleasure, and"I, received the con- M 2 " granulations
-4t ELLEN AND JULIA,,gratulations of my friends. I should have told you, that previous to the death of my father, and frequently afterwards, I had ac¬ commodated both Welsted and Rayner with little sums of money, which I thought I was sure of being repaid when they came of age. and felt much delight in having the power to oblige them; since their being in town their wants were more extended, still I sup¬ plied them with an unsparing hand, and was with difficulty persuaded to take notes for the money.,The expences I was drawn into, the ele¬ gant carriage and liveries I had been per¬ suaded to set up, and its concomitant charges, grew very heavy. Mr. Martin, the clerk I have mentioned, one morning, after apolo¬ gizing for the liberty he felt it his duty to take, laid, that for some weeks past he had been embarrassed to answer the frequent and large demands made upon me, that he every day expected some foreign bills to be pre¬ sented, and that there was very little money in my banker’s hands to answer them, and what
what still more alarmed him, it was whispered, a mercantile house abroad, to whom I had two (hips consigned, were on the eve of a bank¬ ruptcy, feverasof their bills having been pro¬ tested. I was at first much alarmed at Mar¬ tin’s information, but young, thoughtless, and too sanguine in my opinion of mankind, I re- flected, that within a few days I should be of age, and some property more immediately in the care of my trustee, (for he had declined acting in the business of my commercial con¬ cerns) would fall into my hands; my friend Welsted would also be of age within two months, and from him I should receive up¬ wards of two thousand pounds, therefore al¬ together I could ward off present difficulties, and I desired Mr. Martin to make out re¬ gular accounts of debtor and creditor, that I might wind up my affairs, and know exactly how I stood in the world. He seemed pleased with the directions I gave him, and assured me he would set about the task with the utmost expedition,,M 3 He
He had scarcely left me when Rayner came into the room ; there was, I suppose, a little remains of anxiety in my countenance, for he a sited if I was not well. Unaccustomed to have a thought concealed from my friends, I related the preceding conversation, he changed colour, and appeared much surprised, was for some moments silent, but recovering him¬ self, pray, said he, with a mysterious smile, are you satisfied with the integrity of your clerk 3 he is a great favorite I observe with your lady, have you equal confidence in him? I was startled with the observation and ques¬ tion, but replied, that I had an implicit con¬ fidence in him. My dear friend, cried he, looking very serious, you have noble gene¬ rous sentiments, incapable of judging unfa- vcrably of others, from the goodness of your own heart; I may be deceived, I hope I am, but there are certain traits in Martin I much dislike; he has secured an interest in your lady’s esteem, you have given up every thing to his direction, and so much trust and power lodged in the hands of a young man, is a temptation
temptation that requires a wonderful strength of mind and uncommon integrity—I would advise you to look cautiously after him, for I am not singular in my opinion, Welfted thinks exactly as I do, and what I much dis¬ like is, his particular attention to Mrs. —,I cannot give you any idea of the various emotions that all at once assuled me. For heaven’s fake, Rayner, cried I, what is it you mean, what have you observed in Martin’s conduct towards me, or my wife, that can have given rife to your suspicions ? My dear Frank, answered he very gravely, you know I love you, nor would I wound your peace for the world with any idle suspicions, but this Martin I do not like 3 'tis impossible your affairs can be so deranged if he acted up¬ rightly, the other clerk seems a meer cypher, and Martin carries all the authority. But my wife, Rayner, what did you mean by his particular attentions to her ? Why, faith, I think you must be blind if you do not ob¬ serve them yourself3 however, take my ad¬ vice, get your accounts settled and then get,M4 rid
rid of him—mean time, as you are cautioned, you will be enabled to make your own ob¬ servations. Welsted and two other gentle¬ men coming in prevented further conver- fttion at that time, but it made an indelible impression on my mind, and created the vilest and moss unjuft suspicions both of my wife and Martin. The succeeding day, when I became of ago, was appointed for a grand en¬ tertainment, and a very large party was in¬ vited ; unhappy in my mind, I was but ill calculated to promote the festivity of the day, and instead of entertaining my guefts, I was employed in watching the innocent objects of my jealousy ; not a word or look escaped me, and I thought I saw enough in the be¬ haviour of both to justify my friend’s obser¬ vations: For, as Shakespeare fays,," Trifles light as air, are, to the jealous,,“ "Confirmations strong as proofs or"holy writ.”,Filled with the most distracted ideas my manners were so strange and capricious that my wife grew alarmed, and several times ask¬ ed
ed me if I was not well. I was displeased with her hypocrisy, and poor Martin, who conceived my dejection and inequality of temper proceeded from his information, sought by every attention to raise my spirits. The company departed at an early hour, I retired to bed taking but very little notice of my wife, and passed a very sleepless night. The next day I accompanied my friends to Epsom races, and scarcely knowing what I did, but hurried away by example and per¬ suasion, I loft upwards of twelve hundred pounds, besides near five hundred which I engaged for on Welfted’s account, who was also unlucky. Rayner made some betts with more success, but he did not tell the amount. I returned to town in a state little short of madness. Mr. Martin acquainted me the bond I had given at Eaton for fix hundred and forty pounds had been presented, and must be paid the following morning, all the Lash he believed I could draw for then was not quite three hundred unless my banker would permit me to overdraw.. This in tel-,M 5 ligence
ligence shined me, I flew to Rayner’s apart¬ ment, repeated what the other had told me, and asked him if he could accommodate me with the loan of a few hundreds, as I knew he had been fortunate on the race ground. (You are to observe at that very time he owed me little less than three thousand pounds.) I never shall forget his looks. — Good God! cried he, what an unfortunate fellow I am, I won upwards of two hundred pounds and was foolishly persuaded to lend it to a friend before I left the ground; sure never was any thing so unlucky. I was con¬ vinced both from his manner and circum¬ stances this story was not true, yet still unsus¬ picious of his deceit, I concluded, as I knew he at that time kept a girl, that he had en¬ gaged it to her, or was bound to pay money for her, I therefore pardoned his not supply¬ ing me, but was a little displeased at his want of confidence.,I spent another uneasy night, my wife was equally restless, and sighed very often. In the morning I wrote to Welstcd, telling him the
the bond was become due and payment de¬ manded ; I then went into my ’counting house, and examined my books to fee what money I could raise, and to my inexpressible vexation found Martin’s information true. My temper irritated, I turned sternly towards him, how comes it, Sir, said I, that you have paid away such large sums, and driven me to such difficulties, without long ago speaking on the subject ? You will please to remember, Sir, answered he, in a firm but respectful tone, that you long fince gave me orders here, in presence of Mr. Moore, to pay all bills and demands upon you, which should be made, without troubling you on the business; you know. Sir, I have frequently requested you would spare time to examine your books weekly, at least monthly, it would have given much satisfaction to Mr. Moore and myself had you done so, nor did I, ’till a few days ago suppose your cash run so low at your banker’s, when I was informed, upwards of three thousand pounds had been paid at dif¬ ferent times, by your order, to Mr. Welfted,and,6
and Mr. Rayner. That, Sir, replied I, very haughtily, is no business of yours, I shall pro¬ vide against the present demand some other way, mean time I expect you make up your accounts with all expedition. I shall obey you, answered he, both for my own satisfac¬ tion and yours. I turned from him very much ruffled, at the door I met my wife, I was startled, I thought she appeared con¬ fused. Where are you going ? I demanded. To ask Mr. Martin for some paper and pens, answered she in a hurried manner. A good excuse, laid I, with a contemptuous look, and pushed rudely by her. I hastened to the gentleman who had the preceding day deli¬ vered up his trust to me, and the writings of an estate worth about two hundred a year, in Islington, of which my brother had a moiety of equal value; I entreated him to supply me with five hundred pounds for an urgent de¬ mand I was not prepared for, depositing the writings again in his hands; he appeared ra¬ ther surprised, yet, nevertheless, gave me an order on his banker 5 I returned and soon.,after paid the bond.,Rayner
Rayner and Welded dined with me, the latter thanked me for discharging it, and was rejoiced that he should be of age soon to re¬ turn me all his pecuniary obligations. When, we were alone, (for Martin and my wise with¬ drew soon after dinner, though not together) I requested Welded to give me his opinion of Martin, and what deps I had bed pursue relative to my affairs. With a thousand pro¬ fessions of friendship he answered, my dear friend, if you command my sentiments, I have no right to withhold them ; tho,<>Jj*,'' I am sorry to give you pain, yet I mud say I think that fellow, Martin, is too intimate with your wise, pray how long has he lived in your house ? About seven months, I replied. Umph !,1Iile<'*‘' cried he, and I think you was married eight months before your lady shewed any signs of pregnancy, and die is now about fix months gone ? Yes, I replied in a voice of rage and grief, yes5 you are right, the conviction dares me in the face; she was always partial to him, and ever pleased with his company; I fee I am the dupe of both, and well remem. - ber
ber now the advice you both gave me be¬ fore I was married ; fool, blockhead as I was, but I will be revenged on both. Do not be rash, said Rayner, you are still in the rascal' 's power; wind up all your affairs, turn every thing into money, dismiss him with contempt, but do not let him have the gratification to think you are .jealous of him; go abroad with us and leave your faithless wife and her brat with a small annuity to provide forthemselves.,This wife and friendly advise I resolved to follow, I treated my wife with a contempt and indifference that seemed to wound her very foul; I found her often in tears, which I regarded as duplicity and art; fire frequently requested to know what she had done to dis¬ please me, but I declined giving any expla¬ nation of my conduct ; she once or twice took notice of my dislike to Mr. Martin, and spoke in his favor, which only increased my hatred to both. He perlevered in his usual mode of behaviour, always respectful, attentive and diligent; sometimes my opinion of him would be staggered, but the high idea I entertained of
of my good friends’ judgment, and the poison they had infused into my mind were too well rooted to be expelled easily.,"Within a fortnight Mr. Martin, requested my presence in the ’counting house, where he and Mr. Moore had prepared their accounts and made up their books. Every thing was accurate and perfectly plain, not a single er¬ ror appeared, and he produced vouchers for every shilling he had paid, but when I came to the balance, allowing for my property in those two ships whose fate was yet uncertain, and exclusive of my small estate at Islington, I found I was not worth two thousand pounds in the world I Judge of my surprise and horror! In so short a time a property of near thirty thousand pounds dissipated, seemed al¬ most incredible to those unacquainted with the quick transition of money at the gaming tables, or on the turf, I had proofs that from those detestable excesses sprung the evils with which I was now overwhelmed; for though vanity and equipage had made great demands, yec economy might have enabled me to sup¬,port
port them had not extravagance and my friends’ wants claimed so large a share.,When I had inspected every voucher and had reason to be satisfied with the exactitude that appeared in my books, Mr. Martin asked me if I thought he had acted uprightly, I was hurt at the question, yet could not but reply in the affirmative. Well then. Sir, said he, every thing being now settled, I must beg leave to leave your house this day, I have obtained another situation in the house of Mr. Thompson, where I shall be always ready to attend your commands, and explain every part of my conduct that may require investff gation,. either in your commercial concerns, or in my private character; but suffer me, Sir, before we part, to tell you, a time may come when the insinuations of false friends, to the prejudice of one who has your real interest at hearts will be laid open, and the duplicity of one and the sincerity of the other will be fairly judged Taking his hat, he made me a low bow and withdrew..,I
I was speechless for a moment, Moore, the under clerk, said, I am sorry, Sir, you will lose Mr. Martin, he is one of the most steady young men, and of the strictest inte¬ grity I ever knew. Recovering from my re¬ verie, we are all liable to be deceived, replied I coolly, and giving some general orders I left him under very great and painful emotions. Going into my wife's drefllng-room I met Martin coming out, and found her in tears : Excessively enraged I spoke with unusual harshness, which rather increased than stop¬ ped them, and provoked me so highly that I insulted her in the most opprobicus terms I could express, until she dropped senseless at my feet. The fight of an object once so dear to me, quite motionless, recalled a momentary tenderness, I rung for assistance and on the entrance of her woman left the room. I was soon after joined by my two friends, and ex¬ pressed my vexation at the great reduction of my fortune, they looked at each other with astonishment; at last, is it possible, cried VZel- sted, you can',1Iil|—’‘' be reduced so low in cash ?,Having
Having assured him it was but too true, and that my chief dependance rested upon the two ships I had abroad ; they advised me to give up business, sell my small estate, realize all my property, and go abroad, a scheme I very readily adopted. A ft w days after this, intel¬ ligence arrived which put an end to every flattering hope. One of the ships I depended upon had •,1Iil<'*’‘'sprung a leak in a gale the night after she arrived to her destined port, and to which site was insured, and in spite of every assistance (for the sea ran tco high to afford much) that could be given, was driven out from the harbour and foundered : The other ihip had a viliam of a Captain, who Contrived to get a quantity of tobacco bn board, which was contraband, and immediately made an information himself, by which means the ship and cargo were seized, and he obtained half the value for his information, with Which he retired up the country, nor have I ever heard of him since. Such was the news I received, the blow was decisive, I could recover no¬ thing from the insurers, and the credit of my house was completely ruined.,I
I rook a small house at Putney, sent my wife there, she behaved like a heroine:—Do not despond, my love, you have still, from your eftate, a decent income, my fix thousand pounds are safe, we have enough to procure content and happiness superior to thousands, I wish for nothing more than your affection and a decent competency. I was struck with her words and behaviour, I pressed her to my bosom, and promised to be guided by her.,Alas 1 ’twas the resolution of a moment. My two friends condoled with me, their friendship waL a bairn to my heart; I Ibid every thing, paid every one, even the gen¬ tleman who had the writings of my eftate, and on winding Up found I had not more than twelve hundred pounds, exclusive of that pro¬ perty in Islington, in the world, except the sums my friends owed me, which I should soon receive, and determined to place abroad for my use, leaving the eftate for my wife’s support, for I had too much pride to make her infidelity known, neither indeed could I,adduce
-So Ellen and julia.,adduce any proofs of it, but I believed it, and therefore every mark of her affection I con¬ sidered as acts of duplicity. After she was settled at Putney, I continued in town, par¬ taking every riot and dissipation with my best friends, in order to drown care and reflection. I disregarded her pressing entreaties to come to her, although she every hour expected child, but strongly prejudiced that the infant could not be mine, I determined not to be present; within a fortnight Welsted would be of age, I knew I should receive my money as he had some thousands in his own right; Rayner had yet five months to arrive at five and twenty, to which time his grandfather had limitted the possession of an estate of eight hundred a year, in Ireland, with a consider¬ able sum of money; the time therefore drew very near when I should be reimbursed in some thousands, and our intended tour take place.,I had, at this time, lodgings in Jermyn- Street, and saw my friends every day. One morning they called on me, and Welsted, with
■with evident vexation told me, he was obli¬ ged to attend his father the next morning into Oxfordshire, relative to his affairs, and should be wanting five days; Rayner, who visited at his father’s, was to accompany him, and he coolly aiked me to do the fame, but as I had very seldom been at his father’s house, and thought he treated me with a supercilious air I did not like, I declined the invitation; we parted with regret, they assured me of their return in five days, which I told them I should employ in preparations for my departure to the continent. The fourth day after they left me I took it into my head to go down to Putney and acquaint my wife with the ar¬ rangements I had made.,On my arrival at the house and knocking for admittance, the servant let me in ; I asked for her mistress, she was in the garden, she said, with Mr. Martin; my blood boiled with, rage, I ran rather than walked to the garden, and saw them walking down a gravel walk with their backs towards me, I followed with quick steps, and was close upon them before they
they saw or heard me. What right. Sir, I exclaimed, have you to visit my wife when I am not present ? She uttered a faint scream, he was a little startled at my sudden appear¬ ance and peremptory tone, but quickly re¬ plied, no right, Sir, but what friendship and respect gives me. How dare you profane the name of friendship, you who have wrong¬ ed me in the tendereft point; but I shall make no words, instantly leave this house and follow me. I turned abruptly, my wife caught my arm, * hear me, Sir, do not give way to passion and wrong conceptions, let me explain Mr. Martin’s motives.’,Xx<>'*”' I wrested my arm from her with such violence that she fell, Martin flew to assist her: I dragged him from her foaming with rage, and having my horse whip in my hand (coming down on horseback) I handled it with great severity. My wife fainted. After several endeavours he wrench¬ ed it from my hand; he was evidently in much pain : Preserve your innocent unfortunate wife, said he, and. call on me tQ-morrow at eleven, No. 27, America-Sqyare, you shall,then
then do mejuftice. With difficulty he walked away j something like remorse struck me, but when I looked down on my wise, passion again predominated: I saw the servant tun¬ ing towards me, Martin had sent her, I assisted in raising her mistress, and we . got her into the house ; when I saw her senses were re¬ turning I left the room, saying, I would re¬ turn in the morning, but in truth I only in¬ tended writing her, before I saw Martin, to upbraid and take leave of her for ever. I re¬ turned to Jermyn-Street, sat down and exe¬ cuted some writings preparatory to my en¬ gagement next day, and though on cool re- fiection I had no inclination to dueling, nor thought I ought to risk my life for a faithless woman, yet the shameful treatment I had given Martin called upon me, as a man cf honor, to meet him. Under this conviction I was determined to act, I knew neither of my friends could be returned, therefore chose to go alone.,I passed a sleepless night, nevertheless I was punctual to the hour: On asking for Mr.,Martin,
Martin, the servant informed me he was ex¬ tremely ill in bed, but that if my name was -.Mr. Martin wished to lee me. I fol¬ lowed him. On the stairs we met a gentle¬ man, that is the surgeon, said he. I asked him how his patient did. Very ill, Sir, he replied, His fever is very high, and his bruises very considerable, if you are going to his room pray speak very little, he is not fit for com¬ pany. I felt a kind of gloomy pleasure that I had so well revenged myself, and entered^ his apartment with sentiments very unbecom¬ ing a christian. But here, said the gentleman, I must pause, the recollection is too power¬ ful, for my feelings, excuse me for a few mi¬ nutes, I will return and finish my horrible story presently. Saying this he walked hastily away, leaving Evelyn anxious and much in¬ terested for the event.,CHAP,
CHAP. XIV.,HE was wanting near twenty minutes, and seemed to be struggling for resolution and composure. When I entered Martin’s room, continued he, I was shocked to fee the alteration, I started as I drew near the bed, he was groaning with pain. " I am glad to fee you, Sir, though unable to attend you; had I been well I should have disdained to have re¬ quired an explanation, though I guess the cause of the ill treatment I have received; but now I demand from you every particular which has given rise to your behaviour for these last three months.” He spoke with dif¬ ficulty, and I felt a painful sensation that for a moment flopped my tongue, but recover¬ ing, I upbraided him with the duplicity of,vol. i. N . his
his conduct, and the seduction of my wife. Stop, Sir, he cried, dare not accuse me of crimes my foul disdains, nor blight the cha¬ racter of an angel—such is your wife : Tell me, first, how you left the unhappy sufferer ? Perfectly recovered, I replied,sullenly. Thank heaven, returned he; I find I am incapable of a long detail, let me tell you then, briefly, you have b,een the dupe of two vile infamous men; Rayner himself loved and attempted your virtuous wife, disappointment made him her enemy; they, and they only, have been your ruin; to supply their extravagancies they seduced you to follow their example; they did juftice to my integrity and love for you and your wife; me, therefore, they hated, and doubtless infused those suspicions into your mind, which you now upbraid me with, and now they have left, forsaken you, and laugh at your credulity. What do you mean, cried I hastily, by forsaking me ? ■•'’‘ ' They have left England, replied he, they have deceived you ; I have kept an attentive eye upon them for some time, and it was to communicate,my
my discoveries that I went to Putney, I did not choose to intrude myself upon you, but esteem and honor urged me to acquaint your lady, with the intelligence I had gained, and now I solemnly declare, I never had the least improper affection for her, only the highest respect, and that attachment which her merit claims from every one. I pity you, nay I can do more, I can forgive you ; yet, ifl live, we must meet once more, but until you again hear from me L-wish not to see you; respect your wife, do justice to her virtues, ’tis the only reparation you can make.’,His last words were spoken with evident pain, and he turned from me with a groan that pierced my heart, and roused me from the astonishment he had thrown me into. I arose, ‘ if what you say is true, Mr. Martin, I am the basest and most contemptible of mankind, never shall I forgive myself, nor can the meanest humiliation I could make atone to you. .But I fly to obtain a certainty of my folly, and shall then consider what I owe to you.',N 2 x
I left the house instantly, took a hackney coach, and drove to Lord Welsted’s. On asking for his Lordship the porter informed me he was gone down to Oxfordshire. Is Mr. Welfted within ? demanded I. O, no, Sir, he replied, my young master left England five days ago, to go abroad for three years. I felt an odd sensation that almost choaked me, but faheringly I asked if Mr. Rayner was gone with him. He replied in the affirm¬ ative. Conviction of their baseness now stashed upon me at once, I turned from the door, and, scarcely in my senses, returned to my lodgings, there I found a messenger wait¬ ing for me, from Putney, my wife was dan- gerousty ill and requested to see me.,Judge of my feelings when I reflected on the injury I had dene her ! The misery of that moment cannot be described; the intel¬ ligence annihilated every idea but of her, and I stew down to Putney in a state little short of madness. On my arrival I was conducted to her bed-side, she was in agonies of pain; a woman, whom I found was a midwife, with her:
her : Understanding her situation, I sent off express for a gentleman of eminence in the profession; I threw myself on my knees, I ba¬ rked her hand with my tears—Charlotte, my dear Charlotte, forgive your murderer, was"•■-¬-¬’' - all I could utter. Forgive, repeated she in a voice of anguish, do you, my love, pardon me, you are not to blame, believe me inno¬ cent, love my memory, and I shall die happy.,I cannot repeat the scene that pasted, the remembrance is too poignant for repetition, gladly would I have given up life to have preserved her from the dreadful pangs she suffered. The surgeon at length came, I was desired to quit the room, in less than half an hour I was roused from the floor where I had thrown myself, with the news of her delivciy. Intoxicated with joy I flew to her room, the Ductor requested I would not talk, but after some time fitting by her Ilie appeared composed and easy; she said, I willi to be alone for a few minutes with my be¬ loved husband ; the Doctor whispered me,,N 3 he
he would not leave the house, the women withdrew to the adjoining room.,Unable to speak, I pro fl her hand to my lL>s, and viewed her with eyes that spoke not my heart if they did not oveidow with love, sorrow, and repentance 3 she saw my emo¬ tions—Do not reproach yourself said Hie feebly, had I not concealed the baseness of Rayner, nothing of this kind might have hap¬ pened 3 but tell me, tell me truly, what has pasted between you and poor Martin, have you seen him ? I have, I replied, he has told me all, I have been the basest of mankind, the villains Welded and Rayner are fled to the Continent. Thank heaven, replied she, railing her eyes, then all is safe 5 make me one promise, and I will ever bless you ? Name it, I cried, and J swear you shall be obeyed. Never, then, seek those wretches nor place your life in a hazard to be revenged of them, promise me you will never chal¬ lenge either. Judge of my love, and your power over me, when I solemnly declare I ne¬ ver will 3 let them enjoy their villany, we have
have still enough to make us happy. She sighed deeply, but recovering a little, thanked me for the ease I had given to her mind, and requested the women might return. When they came in 1 recollected my infant, it was ■ a boy, I turned and blessed them both, then went down stairs to the Doctor: He said, I am glad you have left the room, your lady is very weak, and must be kept very still. He returned to her apartment, leaving me in a state of mind the most miserable that can be conceived from my anxiety.,Alas! I was soon to be freed from appre- hension, and a dreadful certainty took place I In less than half an hour a servant entered the room, bathed in tears. Oh I Sir, come, come to my mistress. I ran to the bed-side where all were assembled, and my much in¬ jured wife just recovered from a fainting 6t; (he knew me: I threw myself on the bed. My dearest husband, said stie, in a voice scarcely articulate, we must part, be com¬ posed, submit to the will of heaven; I go be¬ fore you, I trust God will one day unite us to,N 4 part
part no mere : Take care of your life, ’tis my last request, be resigned, live to do good to others, and forgive them who have injured us—we are happy, they are wretched. She paused to take breath, seeing me in inexpres¬ sible agonies. My dearest love, strengthen your mind, added the dying saint, why should we consider death as an evil, or be more af¬ flicted at* the approach of it, than of the thousand evils we are hourly subject to ? If we conduct ourselves with propriety in life, ’tis a debt due to nature, and we quit a trou¬ blesome world to enjoy everlasting happiness. Do not repine, I am happy soonest, rather rejoice in my felicity ; I go before, wait your appointed time, and we shall be united for ever. If my child-Here her voice failed li e tried to speak but it was an effort only; sue prell my hand, and whilst my eyes were eagerly fixed on hers, a cold dew fell upon her face, her eyes closed, and with scarce a sigh her spirit fled to that God she had adored and served to the best of her abilities here on earth.,Thus
Thus, by the cruel deceit, the perfidy of the most wicked of mankind, and by the cre¬ dulity and fe *ly of a thoughtless and unwor¬ thy husband, one of the most amiable wo¬ men in the world had her life embittered by sorrow, insulted by neglect, and cut off from every earthly enjoyment before site arrived at the age of twenty. I see your sensibility is wounded, said the unfortunate man to Eve¬ lyn, you mufl: pity though you may despise me : Alas! years of sufferings cannot atone for crimes like mine—but I will hasten to conclude.,What passed immediately after the death of my angel wife I know not, I was carried senseless to another room. On my recovery the worthy Doctor endeavoured to calm the tumult of my mind, not by vain consolations, no — he indulged, he applauded my grief; You have reason to regret, said he, your loss is irreparable, and man, selfish- man, feels only for himself; you are for ever deprived of an amiable wife, a lovely and beloved compa¬ nion; well may you be afflicted and given up,N 5 to.
to sorrow, that she should—be happy so soon; that she whom you possibly loved better than life, should be released from a world of trou¬ ble, misery, and falshood; that escaping the thousand unavoidable accidents in life, the decripitude of old age, the loss of friends, and perhaps a lingering death by many years of ill health ; well may you, my good Sir ., if you consider your present gratification only, mourn for your angelic wife : But if divested of self, you reflect the angel you regret is now happy, for ever happy, can you, dare you wish to recall her from a state of blessedness to a corrupted world ? O, no, continued he, seeing me startled by the solemnity of his manner, I will not think so meanly of you, prove your affection by rejoicing at her bea¬ tification, and submit with manly firmness to the dispensations of the Almighty.,I arose and embraced the worthy monitor, I promised to be composed, but added, mine is no common loss, there are circumstances which embitter the severity of the stroke, which never can be erased from my memory.,My
My dear Sir, answered he, when a man is deeply wounded he is apt to think he mono¬ polises all the miseries of life, nor can the misfortunes of others alleviate ours, yet, as I was getting into my carriage, a friend stop¬ ped me, and mentioned a most melancholy event, an express had just arrived from Do¬ ver, with an account, that the Expedition, Packet, from thence to Calais, was lost the preceding night in a gale of wind, only two persons were saved, and among those who perished was the only son of Lord Welsted. I started and exclaimed, a fun of Lord Wel- sted’s ? Yes, he replied, and with him some other young man of fashion, going on their travels ; his Lordship is in the country, judge what must be his feelings when he receives the account—his only hope in life is gone, neither wife nor child to support the decline of life : Alas! my dear Sir, all human misery is but comparative, and he best obeys the will of his Creator that struggles for firmness and submission to his decrees.,N6,The
The Doctor might have gone on for hours without being interrupted, I was enjoying the gloomy delight of retribution, and judged, heaven had punished the wretches with loss of life, for their ingratitude and viilany to me ; but, when he flopped, awaking as from a dream, I caught his hand with an eagerness that startled him—You have restored me to life, Sir, heaven is juft, and has taken from the world the molt unworthy of mankind— to that son of Lord Welsted’s and his friend I owe all my misfortunes, and the death of that angelic woman, a victim to their base¬ ness. I related to him what I have repeated to you, and in that good man found a com¬ forter and friend. To be brief, for I have been tedious in my story, three days after my wife was interred my little boy died in con¬ vulsions, the consequence, doubtless, of the fits with which his unhappy mother was seized, from the moment I left her that night, when I treated poor Martin so unworthily. Thus I considered myself as the murderer of my. wife and child—Dreadful thought! I re¬ mained
mained at Putney near a fortnight, I had writ¬ ten to Mrs. Medway, and resigned over to her daughter, the fix thousand pounds I had received, and which was in trust for my wife and children, and to which I was, by her death entitled.,On my return to town, overwhelmed with the most desponding melancholy, I sent to enquire after Martin, the answer returned was, that he had been conveyed into the country a few days before, but in so miser¬ able a state from the bruises he had received from some villains, (robbers it was supposed) that there was very little prospect: of his re¬ covery. This was another victim to my crimes! The world grew hateful, to me, a thousand times I was tempted to put a final, end to a painful existence, but heaven, in its mercy, spared me that dreadful completion^ and inspired me with the idea of retiring to some wild solitude, where I might live and repent unknown to all the world, for I de¬ tested mankind, and thought ail men villains. I never tried to recover any money from,5 Lord
Lord Welsted, or Rayner’s father, I had no wants to gratify, no relations who wanted pecuniary assistance, I therefore disposed of my estate, and gave up every thing to my brother, except an annuity of one hundred .a year, which is remitted quarterly to a gen¬ tleman at Kendal, for my use.,I travelled all over England before I could meet with a situation remote and deserted ; this spot at last engaged my attention, I law a mean solitary hut, inhabited by a poor pea¬ sant, his wife, and three naked children, about two miles from hence on the side of the op¬ posite hill, here I fixed my residence; I pur¬ chased a decent bed and furniture, some ne¬ cessaries in the plainest stile, fitted up a room free from the inclemency of the weather, and to the inconceivable surprise of those poor creatures, accommodated myself to their mode of living, with the addition of a good joint of meat on a Sunday, and a side of bacon for an occasional rasher. The man was ho¬ nest and industrious, yet his whole earnings did not amount to three shillings a week. I gave
gave them five shillings a week for my room, and found most of their provisions; I eloathed the poor children, and undertook to teach them reading and writing, it was a relief to my mind, and when I could not walk was my chief employment. Thus, before I was two and twenty I abandoned the world and all its delusions, and have lived sixteen years without exchanging a word with any human being but those worthy peasants; their chil¬ dren are grown up, and are placed in credit¬ able services : Old as I appear I am not yet forty, time has subdued the poignancy of my sorrows, but remorse and habitual melan¬ choly makes me shun all mankind.,Thus, young man, I have related my story, let it warn you against the duplicity and pre-, tended friend sir ip of idle dissipated men, be assured they are incapable of feeling one spark of real esteem, and that in your credulity they seek the gratification of their own selfish views whiph must end in your destruction—• Learn also to distrust those who would poison your mind with jealousy and mean doubts of,your
zSo ELLEN AND JULIA.,your wife and friends ; judge for yourself, be candid and explicit, let sincerity and frankness be the guide of your actions, and, above all, never introduce a man as an inmate into your house, until you are well convinced that his character and principles will stand the test of enquiry; had I, laid he, clasping his hands, had I been more circumspect in my choice of companions, I siiould not have lived ’till this hour a prey to sorrow and remorse, a murderer of my wife and child! Ending these words he rose from his seat, and walked for some minutes in great agitation, then turning to Evelyn, if, after what I have related, you think the acquaintance of such a wretch de¬ serving your notice, meet me to-morrow and I will conduct you to my cottage, there you. will see honest poverty enjoying that content: which prosperous vihany never can attain^ Without waiting for a reply, he went through the door, and left Evelyn under a variety of emotions which his story had given birth to.,Good heaven! thought he, as he walked homewards, how extraordinary, that in this remote
remote corner of the kingdom I should meet with such, I hope, uncommon instances of the baseness and duplicity of mankind; can we be virtuous and happy only by avoiding society ? Surely, no ; man was not made to live alone, nor can evil be predominant in the world, I will not judge so uncharitably: ’Tis a want of prudence, of a proper discri¬ mination, that subjects us to the vices and ill designs of wicked men 5 and if we guard against the duplicity of mankind, ’tis also ne¬ cessary to watch carefully over our own pro¬ pensities, for as they point we are generally biassed towards good or evil, and follow the lead of the companions of our choice.,Ruminating on the story he had heard, he returned to his mother, and not being enjoin¬ ed fecrefy, communicated it to her. She persuaded him to cultivate the acquaintance, it may be advantageous to both, said she, equally amusing and instructive. The fol¬ lowing day Evelyn did not fail to renew his walk, and was soon joined by his unfortunate acquaintance : After mutual salutations he,very
very readily agreed to accompany him to his cottage. Going out at the door they palled through a long pleasant piazza, and after that two long vaulted passages, from which as¬ cending some steps, by another door, they came into a beautiful valley, and from thence, mounting the opposite hill, descended gradu¬ ally down a rocky barren Iide of it, and ar¬ rived at the cottage; its outward appearance was mean enough, but inside every thing was perfectly neat and clean; a pleasant little gar¬ den lay on one side, and a covered hut on the other, to shelter their cow at night. The old woman, in her coarse though clean ap¬ parel, was employed in the business of the house, her looks were mild and cheerful, sire hastened to bring them seats, and presently brought forth a bowl of milk and some fruit. Good dame, said her lodger, I have brought a visitor, the clergyman of the parish, do you know him ? No, indeed, Sir, you know, ever since your honor lived here, you pray and preach to us, and so as ’tis a long way, and poor Roger works hard all the week, so I loves
ELLEN AND JULIA. 283,Joves to set down quietly of a Sunday, and no offence to this good gentleman, I am sure he can’t talk better, or give us more good, advice than you. do ; blessed be the day that you came here, and thank God you have got somebody to talk to better than us poor folks. The old woman, glad likewise to have some¬ body to talk to, would have gone on with the garrulity natural to old age, had not a look silenced her, and a nod towards the door obliged her to leave the room. A very long and interesting conversation ensued j Mr. Evelyn related the story of Mr. Woodville, and from thence took occasion to blame that misanthropy which detached people from the world, in consequence of disappointments they incurred from their own misconduct; and, after many arguments, he at length per¬ suaded the gentleman, whose name he ac¬ knowledged to be Hammond, to visit at the Castle, to cultivate the society of his mother and himself and think more favorably of mankind.,After
After this day they were seldom separate from each other, and, as it often happens, after a seclusion from the world for any time, we return to it again with double eagerness and fresh avidity, so Mr. Flam mo nd found so much delight in the conversation of Mr. and Mrs. Evelyn, that he often staid two or three days together with them.,It was during one of those visits that Mr. Evelyn was surprised by a letter from Lord A—, with the presentation to a living in Kent, as has been before mentioned, accompanied with a handsome present to pay his travelling expences ; equally astonished and gratin, d, he was as no loss to guess from w at quarter the unexpected gift derived its source—’cis to Mrs. Woodville, to her charming daugh¬ ters, cried he, that I am indebted, the favor is not a voluntary one from Lord A—, and my mind revolts against the acceptance of it. That, my dear son, replied his mother, would be an ill judged pride, pardon me for saying so, I feel no obligation to his Lordship, he is only discharging a debt, for such I regard the solemn
solemn promise lie made your father to pro¬ vide for you, and it would be an unworthy return to our kind and generous benefactresses to refuse a gift they have doubtless solicited, and feel as much pleasure in bestowing as you can have in receiving. Well, Madam, re¬ plied her son, I believe you are right, ’tis my misfortune, added he with a sigh, to live in a Hate of obligation, and as that mutt be, I ought to be thankful for the favors I re¬ ceive—turning his eyes on Mr. Hammond, who seemed loft in thought, what are your sentiments, my good friend ? That you have ruined my peace, answered he : Do not be surprised at my assertion, you have taught me the value of society, that I might feel, in a more painful degree, the horror of living alone; for many years, until I saw you, I never breathed a single wish for a companion, you laboured, you forced me to overcome my repugnance, you have taught me to love your good mother and yourself; I was be¬ ginning to feel content; peace, to which I had. long been a stranger, again visited my bosom,
288 ELLEN-¬-¬,r<'' AND JULIA,,bosom, and now, what is the consequence ? I am to return to my solitary cottage more wretched than ever, from having tailed.bless¬ ings I am now to be for ever deprived of— Fool that I was, what had I to do with man¬ kind after being so many years secluded from them.,He arose and traversed the room in great disorder, Evelyn alio arose, and, taking him by the arna, said, earnestly, is it possible you should think I would leave you here ? The other in a tone of great surprise replied, leave me here, for heaven’s sake, where do you suppose I shall go to ? With us, answered Evelyn, in a friendly voice ; yes, with us, I cannot part with you; I am alone in the world, no relations or friends but my respect¬ able mother; young, unacquainted with man¬ kind, I want a friendly hand to guide me, one, who from experience can advise and direct my steps aright—In short I want Mr. Hammond. Me! replied he, in a tone of astonishment, can you suppose I will again emerge into the world. I suppose nothing, answered
answered Evelyn, but that your friendship for my mother and myself will inspire you with resolution to accompany us, you shall have an apartment to yourself and live as retired with us as you can in your cottage, we will never intrude nor even solicit your company, for that shall be a voluntary favor for which we shall be thankful. Hammond shook his head in silence. We have time enough to dis¬ cuss this point, said Mrs. Evelyn, we cannot leave the castle without giving Mrs. Wood¬ ville time to arrange her future household. True, replied her son, I shall write to her immediately.,END OF VOL. I.
yujl Publishedt Price 75.,BELLEVILLE LODGE,,A NOVEL,,IN TVf O.jVO LUMES.,Let perjur,'’*'d flavesSss<hrti-vtf !e to flatt’ry fitj And pow’r reward the prostituted wit;,The gen’rous bosom dares with scorn behold Corruption',1Iil*’'s baseness tho',1Iil<*’' enshrin’d with gold : Who, steel’d to ill, the cause of right defends. Is snatch'"’■-¬‘*'d at once to gild corruption',t1Iil’*'s ends.,LONDON:,PRINTED FOR WILLIAM LANE,,AT THE,kVineivs Vreks, LE ADENH ALL-STRE E T.,■ M DCC xcin.