Disclaimer: This file is generated using OCR (optical character recognition) and/or HTR (handwritten text recognition), which are technologies that convert images of text into text. While the technologies are good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
The mysterious warning, a German tale. In four volumes. By Mrs. Parsons. ...
Ió' i? C' 2V 7' 1 S P 1 B C.,·~'. -T
THE MYSTERIOUS WARNING,,A GERMAN TALE.,IN .FOUR VOLUMES.,__ BY MRS. PARSONS.,AUTIOR OF - VOLUNTARY EXILE, &c. -...-.... " Thus conscience Can make cowards of us all.",'VOL. I. LONDON: PRINTED FOR WII.llA LANE,,AT l:. Siicinta15Srec, LEADENII tLL-STRLET.,M.DCCXCtI.
T O HER ROYAL HIGHNESS THE PRINCESS OF WALES, MADAM,. T HAT refped, which High Birti,,,exalted Station, and personal Charms, exats, is generally paid with- out discrimination, because they are adventitious circumflances from whence,a no, *I
no merit can be derived tor the poffef6rr: But when added to these, we fee the most brilliant accomplishments, a graci- oufrefs of rmanners, a condescending fwc.etnefs, that implies a. wish to be diftinguilhed more by goodness than. greatness; then, indeed, we cheerfully tender the homage of our hearts, and. feel the highest gratification when uni-,ging admiration with refpeA,. we love- ?.nd reverence the fame objet.,To this voluntary homage your Royal Highl.efs is more peculiarly entitled,. the di nified features in your character are ar'ablity, and that condescension, which, from the pre-eminencoeofyour situation, have irresistible claims upolp the nind, confirms the fascination of tl'e eve, and has insured to you, Madam, rla a-ec-ion of a. grateful and admiring peo;iTe.,The.
The suffrage or praise of an obscure individual can be no ways interesting to your Royal Highness; happily your virtues and graces speak for themselves, and require no officious herald to blazon them to the worlds,Under this conviction I. repress my own feelings, and have only to acknow-. ledge, with equal pride and gratitude, the lively sense I entertain of the diftin- guifhed honour conferred on me, in, being permitted to inscribe the following Work to your Royal Highness; though I have not the presumption to hope you can derive much amusement from the perusal. The few preteniions I ave to merit are merely negativeones: I have never wu :'Ai a line tending to cor- rupt the heart, fully the imagination, or mislead the- judgment of my young Readers.,With
With the most profound refpef, and every sentiment that admiration and gratitude can inspire, I have the honour to remain,,Madam, Your Royal Highness's,Most obliged,.,And moif devoted,,,Humble servant, Leicefter-Square, No. 22,,Ncv. I5, 1795.,ELIZA PARSONS.
A CARD. PTHE Author of the following Work feels her-,self under the necessity of apologizng to her numerous Friends, for the too frequent demands she makes on their indulgence.-Confcious of her de- ficiency in talents, inclination has no share in her feeble attempts to entertain the Public: She ob- trudes neither from vanity or confidence, and ihrinks from the severity of criticism, in the hope that her insignificance may protea her from the pointed darts of ridicule.-To wit and humour, the effervescence of a lively imagination and a happy turn of mind, she can make no pretensions; her 'former works have been thought to dwell too much on scenes of horror, and melancholy events; she cannot refute the charge: Perhaps her writings take their colouring from her mind ;-when the heart is not at ease, it is incapable of communicat- ing cheerful ideas to the descriptive pen . therefore she wifely declines an attempt ihe is unequal to, of dLivertnlg her Readers,,Dulness 6
[ 2 ] Dulness is a defec of the head, and is pardon- able.-Wit, and spirited talents, are too often apt to run riot; their redundancy may sometimes draw vicious characters, and describe profligacy of man- ners in such seducing glowing colours, as to asset the imagination, to catch the attention of young people, into whose hands works of this kind fre- quently fall, and may have the dangerous tendency to leiftn the horror they ought to feel at vice, and the detcfation such characters should inspire.,The Author of this Work is a Parent; as such, she has been ftri&ly observant that her writings fould never offend against delicacy or common fenfe.-She has never dictated one page, or fug- gested one idea inimical to the precepts of virtue, or that ihould suffuse the cheek of innocence with a blufh.-Here refts her merit; she has no other claims, and throws herself on the mercy of liberal and candid minds.
MYSTERIOUS WARNING.,CHAP. I. N O sooner had the struggling foul,escaped from the clay-cold body of Count Renaud, than his eldest- son, Count Rhodophil, hastened to the library, and opening the secret cabinet, where his late father usually deposited his papers of confe- quence, after a strict examination of the contents, returned to the anti-chamber, on the floor of which lay extended his brother, the deeply-afflicted Ferdinand, just recovering,VOL. I, B from
from a fainting fit, and overwhelmed with inexprtffible anguish.," Brother !" said Rhodophil, in an accent of grief and tenderness, " Brother ! here is my father's will, and I have little doubt but that you will find he was your father also, and that, however severely his resentment was expressed in his life-time, he has not extended it beyond the grave, nor forgotten, in the disposal of his effects, that he had a younger son, and a grand-child.",Ferdinand, who had been lifted from the floor, turning his eyes on his brother with a look of fixed sorrow, exclaimed, "His will! Alas ! what have I to do with that ?" He expired-without feeing me, without granting me, all I ever wished for, or ex- pected, his pardon, and his blessing! 0, Rhodophil! my friend-my brother-why, why did you not urge him to pronounce me forgiven in his last moments, to revoke that,curse,
curse, which now weighs me down to the earth with sorrow and remorse !,c Did Inot urge him," replied the Count, "c Did I not supplicate him on my knees in your behalf ? Did I not beseech him to con- fider your situation and his own? Unjust Ferdinand to reproach me-me, who have for three years wearied my father with tears, supplications and entreaties, to forgive and receive you to his paternal arms ! What have I left unsaid, or undone, to convince you of my brotherly affection ?"," Pardon me," cried Ferdinand, extending his hand: " Forgive me, my dear brother, I know my inexpressible obligations to you; but grief, despair, and heart-rending retro- fpe&ions, deprive me of my reason. 0, my father ! to the grave, even beyond this world, haft thou carried thy hatred and reprobation of thy wretched son ! How great, how good, how benevolent, how forgiving to all, was Count Renaud ! What then must my crimes,g 2 have
have been, in what magnitude muff they have appeared to him, thus to draw down everlaf- ting refrntment!",He covered his face with his hands, and throwing his head upon the bosom of his brother, wept aloud; his whole frame was convulsed, and Rhodophil was obliged to call for assistance, that he might be conveyed to a bed, where it was some hours before the extreme violence of his feelings subsided into a melancholy silent sorrow. His brother and the steward of the late Count remained with him, and when they found the turbu- lence of grief had a little abated, the Count again mentioned the will.,"As it may be possible rome particular orders may be given refpeting the funeral, and more than probable that the contents of this packet may speak peace to your wounded mind, it is necessary, my dear brother (con- tinued he) that we break the feals." -- Ferdinand bowed an assent; speech was de-,nied
nied him at that moment, the principal do- mefrics being summoned to the apartment, Rhodophil broke the feals, and delivered the packet to the steward.," Do you read it," said he; "neither my eyes or my heart will permit me to do it."- The steward obeyed. There was a schedule of his eflate and effects, which "in a few words Count Renaud gave to the entire pof- session of his dear and dutiful son Rhodophil, a few legacies only excepted to his servants.' " How !" cried the Count, " all, what all to me! Impossible! Is there no mention made of my brother ?"," No, my Lord," replied the old man, delivering the papers with a look of sorrow; " no, I have too truly read all the contents.",Not a word escaped from the lips of Ser- dinand; at that moment riches or poverty was indifferent to him, nor could the wealth,B3 of
of nations have given him peace or comfort, when unaccompanied with the forgiveness of a parent.," How cruel, how unjust !" cried Rho. dophil; " but he knew my heart. Yes, my dear brother," added he, embracing Ferdi- nand, "our father well knew that in giving all to me, he had procured to me the inex- prefible delight of voluntarily sharing it with my brother. Henceforth (looking round on the servants) know you have two masters; my brother is equal with me in fortune, power, and command.",The servants bowed and withdrew, all but the faithful and affeftionate Ernest, who had been upwards of twenty years steward to the late Lord, and had ever fondly loved the unhappy, reprobated, Ferdinand. - Rhodophil reiterated his caresses, and tender exprefions: "We will no longer be fepa. r.ted (said he ) your Claudina, your little,Charles,
Charles, ihall be equally dear to me, as to yourself.",Ferdinand started up:--" Claudina! my Claudina !" repeated he, "Well, have you reminded me, I left her opprffeed with sick- ness and sorrow."," Haften to her, then," said the Count; " let her be removed to the Castle imme- diately accommodated here, the will loon be restorcd to health,",Rhodophil withdrew; his brother taking Ernest by the hand, " My worthy old man, your looks bespeak ajfympathizing foul. - You read my heart: Oh ! Ernest, it is not the loss of riches I deplore, my brother's kindness will relieve me there; but a fathet's curse, carried beyond the grave ! there, there's the wound that never can be healed. My wife, poor, poor Claudina I how shall I return to tell her the fad event, already,B 4 finking
finking under sorrows the thinks she has deferved-in her situation too !"," Dear mailer, dear Sir," cried Ernefl, " I beg you to take comfort, the worst is now pall, I am sure, I know my late good mafier forgave you in his heart, his mind never, never, harboured eternal displeasure and resentment. Things are contrary to my expectation; but-I dare not fay all I think, nor will it avail now; but I beseech you, Sir, to haften home to your poor dwelling, from whence you Ihall quickly return with all that is dear to you; I will prepare every thing, and then follow you."-With a heavy sigh that seemed to burfl his heart-strings, a look of inexpressible grief, Ferdinand wrung his hand, and with flow and trem- bling steps repaired to his humble habitation in the suburbs of Badan, about a mile from the Castle of Renaud.,When his fooftReps reached the threshold, he flopped, and paused : "The truth will,kill
kill her (cried he:) " Sure, if ever decep- tion was pardonable, it may be now yet how dearly have I already paid for the vio- lation of truth! Heaven pardon me, for I must deceive her. Alas ! one deviation from rectitude is p oduEtive of innumerable errors which spring from each other, and plunge us rapidly into guilt !" He entered the house at the very moment when his unfortunate wife had given birth to a daughter. The intel- ligence pierced his heart: " Another burthen on the bounty of a brother !" exclaimed he,. softly as he passed to the room where his Claudina lay. The fight of her instantly banished every idea, but anxiety for her safety.,He flew to her, " My love ! my wife !" She fixed her feeble eyes upon him : " I am become a mother to another poor unfortu- nate. Ah! Ferdinand, have you found a father ?" What a dagger to the heart of her husband was this question!,B 5 '"cA4
" All is well, my love," answered he, firuggling to repress his emotions: " Com- pose your mind, and expea happier days, the moment you can be removed without danger, we shall reside at the Caftle."-She uttered a faint exclamation ofjoy, and fainted. Ferdinand was terrified, and blamed himself for his abrupt communication; but happily she was soon restored, and capable of rejoicing at such unhoped-for intelligence."," You are no longer reprobated then,' said she, tenderly kissing his hand, "no lon- ger consigned to misery, and our dear infants will not endure the pinching gripe of poverty. Blessed, blessed Count ! you have at length relented, and I may think existence a blessing." This apofirophe was more than the unhappy Ferdinand could bear. Unable to speak, he hastily left the room; his poor deceived wife judging what he must feel from such a (sup- psed) revolution in his circumfiances, ima- gined he had withdrawn, that their mutual transports might not too much agitate her,spirits;
spirits; a thousand pleating visions floated in her brain, and to have her husband restored to a father's love, to have her dear children rescued from want and mifcry, were such delightful considerations, that she was not sorry she could indulge them freely, and repressed her curiosity for particulars, satisfied that the event was certain.,Mean time Ferdinand fat loft in thought,. and overwhelmed in wretchedness, the kind- ness of his brother afforded no compenfa- tion for the unalterable displeasure of his father, nor could he reconcile to himself,. that determined hatred which one error (in his eyes a venial one, and not deserving such everlasting resentment) had drawn upon him, as at all confifent with the benevolence which had always formed a distinguished feature in the character of the late Count Renaud. Tormented by these painful con- jeEtures he was found by Ernest, who came to acquaint him, that he had given orders for apartments to be instantly prepared for,B 6 him
him and his family, and was come to wait on his Lady to the Castle.,Ferdinand, roused by the entrance of his good old friend, soon informed him of the impossibility of their immediate removal, from his wife's situation, and also of the deception he had been compelled to give into.-" She does not as yet know of my father's death (continued he;) her too sus- ceptible heart would fink under the know- ledge of what my sufferings muff be in such circumstances; by degrees, as her itrength returns, I muff reveal the dreadful truth:- But, oh ! my friend, I cannot live a burthen on the bounty of a brother, something I muff resolve on, and if his kindness protects my wife and children, I will endeavour to 1up, port a separation from all that is dear to me,. and carve out my own fortune by my sword.,Ernest had nothing to answer against this resolution but affectionate regrets, he had but too much cause to think the intention.,would.
would be as necessary as it was becoming in a young mall of spirit and honour there- fore he only hoped, " that his dear young master would do nothing rashly, but wait until his wife and children could have some certain independence secured to them.",How! (replied Ferdinand) would you have me limit my brother's bounty, or seem to doubt his generosity and kindness ? How contemptible should I appear in his eyes by a bare suggestion, by the remotest hint, that I wished for any certainty more than what I may rely on from his affection and gene- rofity, so recently proved on an occasion, where not one out of a million would have conducted themselves with that nobleness of spirit, that true fraternal affection Count Rhodophil has manifested."," I presume not, Sir," answered Ernef, respectfully, "to diEtate, or even to. advise you; but, nevertheless, as we are all mortal, subj.ef every hour to be suddenly deprived,of
of health and life, as we can no more answer for our own hearts than for ourown lives, as it is possible Count Rhodophil may marry, and new engagements may give birth to new sentiments; all there natural occurrences may happen, and both for your childrens' fake, and for his honour, it would be better to place a circumstance, of so much confe- quence to your family, beyond the power of chance to injure them.",I own (said Ferdinand, after pausing a few minutes) I own what you fay is both wife and prudent; but such a proposition as re- lates to any settlement :nui originate with my brother.-No selfish proposals, no nar- rownefs of heart, shall mark my conduct, or render me less generous than himself.",Ernest sighed, but was filent.-The other observing his'dejecion, dded: " You know, my old friend, that Rhodophil's mother was a woman of very superior birth, with a much larger fortune than my mother could boast,,,who,
who, though by no means despicable, yet owed her elevation to my father's rank, more to her beauty than hereditary claims, there- fore my brother's generosity is the more estimable.",(( You, Sir, are the best judge (replied the steward) and I hope you will forgive my pre- fumption, which is directed by true affection to your interest."," I know it well (answered Ferdinand) but now, my good Ernest, return, and ac- quaint my kind brother of the event, which. mufl preclude us from removing for some time. In the evening, or to-morrow morn- ing, you may expect me, for i have a me- lancholy duty to perform, from which nothing shall divert me.",The steward bowed, and was about to retire, but stepped a few paces very reluc- tantly; then suddenly turned-" Sir (said he). I hope you will notbe offended if I presume,to;
to leave this purse; when you are fettled at the Castle, you may return it." He laid the purse upon a chair, and hastened out of the house.," Good creature ! (exclaimed Ferdinand) I will not now mortify thee by a reffial of proffered kindncfs, because now 1 know I fhail have it in my power to repay the money, and reward thee tenfold in thy estimation, by my attentions and marks of gratitude." - He strove to stifle his painful reflections by procuring several little necessaries and indul- gencies for his Claudina, which in her fitua- tion were wanted, and which the fear of not being able to supply had tormented him for many preceding days. She received and enjoyed them with delight, as the proofs of a parent's returning affe&ion..-In the even- ing, when Ferdinand was fitting by her bedside, and she observed the deep gloom that every now and then pervaded his sea- tures, in spite of all his efforts to appear happy. She looked at him several moments,in;
in silence, then pressing his hand: "My dearest husband (said the) from whence pro- ceeds that sorrow which clouds your features, and seems to fill your eyes with tears ? Tell me, have you deceived me into hope, or is your father's forgiveness fettered with con-- ditions that distress your feelings ? Your looks correspond not with the joyful intelli- gence you communicated this morning. - Tell me, I beseech you, what there is be- hind which is a drawback upon such an event as I thought must have insured your hap- piness.",Ferdinand endeavoured to recover himself, and by a little evasion' prepare her for future communications.--" Your penetration, my dear Claudina, cannot be eluded; know then that the fate of my father is such as inclines me to think it is almofR past a doubt, that you will fee him no more. I fee you are affeEted (added he) but you know he has long been ill, and therefore such an event may be expected; compose yourJelf, how-,ever,
ever, and do not let me be doubly afflited; to morrow I shall fee him again; perhaps, at my return I ihall be in better spirits." -," Heaven grant it (returned the, sighing.) Ah! what a world is this, so chequered, that seldom any good arises without its concomi- tant share of evil !"," True, nhy love (answered Ferdinand ) but then reverie the piture, and thank our bounteous Father that almost every evil to our irmprfeEt view, brings with it some allevi- ating eireumfaances we cannot always foresee.","( Yes (returned Ihe) perhaps we are in- debted to his increased weakness, and expec- tancy of death, the very pardon, and favour he has accorded to us. Would to Heaven, however, that-I may once more fee, and thank him on my knees for his goodness to you and my dear infants !",Ferdinand
Ferdinand could not stand this, tears guffied \from his eyes, and, throwing his arms round her, he freely indulged them. She also wept, but not with that poignancy of sorrow to injure her health, the mutual indulgence re- lieved, and after a time, afforded them a melancholy composure.,CHAP. IL rT HE next morning, Claudina having,past a tolerable night, and her spirits being much better, Ferdinand left her avow- edly to vi/it his father. On his arrival at the Castle, he saw the solemn preparations for an event that filled him with horror. Send-,ing.
ing for the steward, " My dear Ernest (said he) I must fee my father, he lhall not be committed to the earth without my tears bedewing his clay-cold form, without sup- plicating his hovering spirit to speak peace and pardon to his most wretched son! Let me not be interrupted in my laft.duties; I will not be long, but I must be alone.",Ernest bowed in silence, and conducted him to the chamber of death, calling from thence those whose duty it was to watch the sacred remains. All departed; Ferdinand shuddered involuntarily at the scene before him, day-light was excluded, the glimmering tapers, the folernn stillness, the black pall thrown over the bed which concealed alife- less form, once so beloved and revered, ac- customed to smile upon a then darling son, and hold him to his heart with unutterable fondness.,( Oh ! (cried Ferdinand, agonized by the painful recollection) oh! just Heaven, how,severe
severe has been my punishment for one a& of disobedience !" -He advanced hastily to the bed, withdrew the pall, and saw a face from which death had excluded no trait of mild benevolence; the features were placid and serene, yet Ferdinand thought, on a near investigation, that an air of sorrow was dif- fused over the countenance, and that the very serenity wore more the face of pious resignation than perfect content. He gazed with inexpressible sensations, threw himself on his knees in an agony of grief:-" 0, father, ever revered and beloved! forgive your unhappy son, let not fry offence be remembered against me in the land of spirits; for, oh! severe has been my puniihment, misery has followed hard upon my difobe- dience !",His head fell upon the bed, and he wept aloud; but his almost flagnated senses were instantly recalled by a deep and heavy groan that vibrated to his heart: He started up,,. and eagerly gazed on the lifeless body, all was,fitill
still as death; he looked fearfully round the room, the gloom seemed increased, the tapers burnt more dimly, horror took possession of his foul; the groan was not a chimera, not the illusion of fancy; but from whence could it proceed, for it seemed very near to him ? Again he turned his eyes to the bed, busy imagination, agitated spirits, and uniteady eyes, made him conceive the lips moved; overcome with every sensation that terror, panting expecation, and trembling appre- henfion, could inspire, he funk again on his knees, attempted to speak, to look, but the words died on his lips, and involuntarily he hid his face by the fide of the pall. Almost instantly a low and hollow voice pronounced the words "Pardon and peace!" He heard the words diftintly, attempted to rife, but with a faint {hriek fell senseless on the floor!,On his recovery, he found himself sup- ported in the anti-chamber by Ernest and a maid-servant; the voice still seemed to vi- brate in his ears; he looked earnestly from,one
one to the other: "How came I in this apartment ?" demanded he.,"C We heard a sudden scream," answered Ernest, " and entering the next room found you on the floor; we brought you here, and, thank Heaven, you are recovered."," Recovered !" repeated Ferdinand, - " Good God! what have I ."," You may leave the room," said Ernest to the girl.-She obeyed.-" Dear mailer," continued he, "compose yourself, why, would you wound your heart by a fight ?"-,cc A fight!" repeated he again; "Ernest, dear Ernest, deem me not visionary or mad but credit me, when I declare to you I have heard my father's voice pronouncing the blessed words ' Pardon andpeace.'-Yes, such were the words; it was not the effet of fancy, but a reality; the voice still hangs upon my ear, and I will now believe, that the spirit of the good and ju.t man may be per- mitted to convey happiness Jonmetimes to the wretched. My bosom seems lightened, my,heart
heart beats more freely, and I already feel returning peace.",," Thank Heaven!" cried Ernest, " I have no doubt, Sir, of your veracity, for you were never given to indulge visionary or fu- perftitious notions. Extraordinary things do happen sometimes to be sure, but, if what you have heard was to be related, it might injure weak and credulous minds, and cause many ridiculous stories; it will be best therefore, my dear master, to conceal the whole affair, and submit with resignation to the stroke that now afflits you, comforting yourfeif with the remembrance of those words which were spoken to console your mind, and relieve you from the opprefion of that imprecation which has so long and so cruelly disturbed you."," I am relieved," answered Ferdinand, " that painful stroke is removed, at least, I hope so: Alas! happy I can never be; yet, my good Ernest, had my lamented father fanEtioned my marriage by his forgivenes, had I been confidered as a child, few men would,have
have known more true felicity, for my Clau- dina justifies my choice; she is the best of women, and of wives."," Then, Sir, you have more happiness than falls to the lot of thousands, and there- fore should be content; but pray walk down, your brother, my Lord, the Count, is ex- peEting you." With a look of awful vene- ration and sorrow, Ferdinand threw his eyes on the opposite room, and without speaking descended to the saloon.,Rhodophil rose and embraced him, and, without reverting to the melancholy visit he had been paying, congratulated him on the safety of his wife, and the birth of his daugh- ter. " I trust (said he) she will soon be in a state of health to be removed hi her, and will confider this house as her own: - Mean time, I hope, I shall be admitted to pay my refpeds to her.",Ferdinand, whose mind was in a slate of agitation, equally susceptible to joy, or grief,,VOL.. . C was
was.painfully asseted by his brother's kind- ness, his heart overflowed at his eyes; but a little abashed at such womanish weakness, which the other seemed superior to, he hastily difterfed the drops that forced their way down his cheeks, and, in a faltering voice, thanked the Count for his attention to his wife, and assured him she would rejoice to behold him. One thing, however, he must premise to him, previous to the visit.,He then explained to him the necessity he had been under to disguise the truth of the late events. " She believes (said he) my father has forgiven me; that he frill exists, and that I may probably be included in his will. I dare not yet acquaint her with the extent of our obligations to you; the death of my father I shall announce to her, the reft must follow some time hence: I know so well her sensibility, and the delicacy of her affeEtion for me, that, was she now informed I was unpardoned, portionless and dependent, Ihe would accuse herself as the cause of my,misfortunes,
misfortunes, and her constitution, which has been impaired already by her regrets on this head, would be unable to fuifain the shock. Will you then, my dear brother, vouchsafe to countenance the deceit, and excuse the omission of those grateful effusions you are fojuftly entitled to ?","Mention it not (cried the Count) you owe me no obligations, I have merely per- formed a duty, and a sacred trutt; I beg therefore neither you nor your wife will ever pain me by acknowledgments I am ro ways entitled to; for had our situation been re- versed, would you have done lcls fur we ?"," No, by Heavens ! (exclailmed Ser i- nand, with fervor) that wealth would h:ve been worthless to me without the particia- tion of my beloved Rhodophil."," I believe you (said the other) therefore here ends the chapter of obligations and thanks, for we are friends as well as brothers.",They then entered upon some consultations on domestic affairs, after which Ferdinand,C 2 retired
retred to break the death of his father to his wife; but not before the Count had pressed upon him a iumn of money, that made Ernefft's grateful service useless for the present, and which he repaid before he left the house. - On his way home, the recollection of the scene in his late father's apartment, a scene which, however ifrange and improbable it would appear on relation, he was perfectly convinced was not the illusion of his senses, and which seemed to him the voice of the dead speaking peace to his wounded mind.,The more he reflected on the circumstance, the more extraordinary it appeared. The refusal of Count Renaud to admit him to his pretence in his last moments, to bestow one confolingword, nor yet even to recall the heavy curse that he had laid upon him when his union with Claudina was declared. Such stern, such unrelenting anger, seemed as inconsistent with his natural goodness of heart, as a pardon pronounced after death. -,cc Al'
" All supernatural interpositions (thought he) I have ever discredited, but I cannot resist conviEtion; possibly my father did not think his dissolution so very near, strong re- fentments cling to the heart, and he thought I deserved to susser. Perhaps, at the very moment when he felt the awful reparation between the foul and body, he might wijh to pronounce my pardon; and how that wish has been granted is a mystery incomprehen- fible to me, and possibly improper for me to desire a solution of." The agitation of his spirits was visible in his countenance, and when he entered his wife's humble apart- ment, the disorder of his air caught her at- tention.,' Ah! (cried fie) my dear Ferdinand, I fear to afk.-Your father !",(' You already anticipate the event (said he, throwing hinfelf into a chair) your con- je6tures are but toojuft."," Alas ! (returned she, softening into tears) how painful the. refletion, that we cannot,C 3 now
now have the power to shew our love and gratitude, and that the pardon he has ac- corded to us, was more, perhaps, an aft of piety than the result of filial affcftion.",' We rmuft not be too nice (answered he) in our search after the motives of our best acions, but be coinLent to judge of them by their effecs: If he condescended, inhisown good time, to reconcile us to ourselves, and to forgive us in his last moments, it is our duty to be thankful, and to examine no far- ther."-Claudina, who saw his mind was disturbed, and knew how to allow for it, made no reply; but after she had indulged those tears the found it impotfible to repress, held up her sweet infant to his view, and exulted in the resemblance she traced between its unformed features and himself. Melted bv her tenderness, and gazing on the lovely child, he embraced both wxith ardour, and, in grateful acknowledgments for the blessings before him, forgot, for a flort time, both recent afflictions, and puzzling conjectures.,The
The funeral obsequies of Count Renaud, being over, Claudina able to leave her bed, and her husband more composed, though far from being tranquillized as his brother seemed to be, they began to think of a re- moval to the Castle, where in truth Claudina was veir anxious to reside ; nor is it to be wondered at when she contrasted her mifera- ble apartment with the noble and splendid rooms at the Castle. Her humble dwelling was in the suburbs of the city, a lowly roof, small circumference, and meanly furnilhed; there she had known the extreme of wretch- ednefs; now She was invited to partake of grandeur, to confider herself as the mistress of that superb mansion, and to fee her dear children cloathed, and attended suitable to their father's birth: 'Tis not surprising there- fore that ihe exerted unusual strength to bear the removal, nor that, when she was fettled at the Castle, the satisfaction of her mind should communicate itself to her body, and render her recovery equally rapid and perfect.,C 4 Rhodophil
Rhodophil treated them with the highest degree oftendernefs and consideration ; every wish was anticipated, and he doated on the children. Near a month had passed in a most delightful manner on the part of Clau- dina, but a deep and increased melancholy clouded the mind of Ferdinand; to live idle and inactive, dependent on the bounty of a brother, even the small allowance which his late father had afforded him, he could no longer call his own. The Count, indeed, was profuse in his presents of money and valuables to his wife; but was there not something mean and selfish in the acceptance? Could they last for ever? Might not his brother marry, and, if so, what then might be their fate ? He recol!eaed the advice of Ernest, but could he condescend to aj, what, if agreeable to his brother's inclinations, he would voluntarily offer-a settlement ? No, he vould die first. He was resolved to enter into the Emperor's service; but what could be done for his wife and children during his,absence,
absence, and before he had the power to assist them ?,Under these, and a thousand other painful refietions, he used to eicape from the obfer- vation of his brother and his wife, and range from the gardens to the wilderness, andfrom thence into an adjoining forest, where he commonly spent hours every day, forming a thousand schemes, and rejecting them as quickly from their uselessness or impractica-' bility. One morning, as he was taking his customary ramble, at the entrance of the forest he met Ernest. He started, " Pardon me, my dear master (said he) if I have bro- ken upon you abruptly; I have long observed your solitary walks."," You have watched me then (cried Ser- dinand, rather haughtily) it is an unbecoming liberty."," Pardon me, Sir (returned Ernest, in a tremulous voice, and with a look of humble sorrow) pardon your poor servant, if duty and affeation - .",C 5 "My
c My good old friend! (exc'aimed the other, instantly recullccling himieif, and affi. ed of his T ui : ncc) my fait-ful Erncft, pardon me; I know your attachment, and tmu.v love you; but indeed I am altered, vexa:'on and pcrp,:,itv loui my di'pofition, I g:c-w hateful to mysel' and to others." The old man, overcome by this condescension, coulk;i ni-i humbled himfeif at his feet, but being picflcd for tine, and anxious to know if his " por endeavours" could in any ihape be ufciL, he earneltiy besought Ftrdinand to ex;-lan the cause of his melancholy.,He very readily acknoivedged to him every feeling of his heart, and added, " that he ':'as come to a determination to quit the Castle, bur was distracted on account of his wife and children."," As you resolve not to speak to your brother about any partition of my late maf- ter's eftfcts, or any settlement for your chil- dren, I beseech you, Sir, to suspend your refolurion for a few days, and, perhaps, I may,obtain
obtai;: ome '%; mtnrion that may be of con- fe. ,:c@. SP..ar nor, S'r (added he, feeing Fe.-'', n;i g.as ^,ing to speak) do not be appilcr -l',' T mean ti', ,ay any thing to the Cc rnt; j a,!l nlt h noured with his notice fiu;. ientlv to a.;tnorife any fieedom of speech or my p.,rt; but I have other designs, and the result you Ihall know in a day or two." . With a low bow the good man departed, leaving Ferdinand penetrated with gratitude for the affeti:bnate concern this faithful fol- lower of his broken fortunes had ever manifested towards him and his family.,C6 CHAP.
C H A P. III. W HEN the over-charged heart vents,itself in a friendly communication, it lightens the oppressive load, and admits a ray of hope to illumine the prospect of future hours. Ferdinand returned to the Cattle with quicker steps, and a countenance less overcast than for many preceding days; in the garden he met his wife under the sup- prrting arm of his brother; he joined them, and was composed enough to converse freely on several fubjeas. Among other things, the war with Pruflia was mentioned, and he dropped a hint that he should like the ser-,vice,
vice. Rhodophil applauded his spirit, and observed, " that a young man, with'his bro- ther's address and vivacity, would be a great acquisition to the army.","c Vivacity ! (repeated Claudina) alas ! it is long since that any traces of pleasure or vivacity have been visible in my poor Ser- dinand."," Then (returned the Count) he muff be the most insensible of men; with such a wife, and such lovely children, I think him un- commonly fortunate."-At that instant the nurse appeared with the infant; Claudina quitted them, and retired into the house with her child.,' I think, brother (said Rhodophil) you seemed to express yourfelffeelingly on the -subje&t of the war; have you any wish to' offer your services ?",(' I have (replied Ferdinand, rejoiced at this opening) nor would I hesitate a moment but on account of my family. I hope my dear brother can have no doubts or fears,concerning
concerning their happiness; I take upon me to ensure you every thing that affcEci n or fortune can procure for their ple' ir: ;,;.d comfort; andyou may commai;d wh:aier is neceiffTry or proper for your apiearance, .:th honour to yourself, and credit to your ranily. Surely we have no separate iptcrci:-.",I think n(ci (ep-licl Fe:d;nlp:d) at ;afi I know my he'art p r'ticipates ii eveiry e!j)y- mert of ycurs, and if I feel any di{trcts it is all my own."," But why should you feel any (afiled Rhodophil) when you Mlave only to speak your wifses, and they will be gr.lfied."," Gererous frie.k' ! (exclaimed the other) will you then endeavour to reconcile Clau- dina to my departure ? Will you employ your interelf to procure for me a commission and int:-o.'uiicn to the Emper.r ?"," I will do every thing you wish for (re- turned the Count) and this very day shall witness my affection for yourself and family.",This
This conversation restored Ferdinand to some degree of composure, and bid him look forward to a situation where he might at leaf: be independent, and he frill hoped his bro- ther would make some fixed establishment for his family previous to his departure. - That evening the Count told him he had written to Vienna, ( and as I entertain no doubts respecting the success of my applica- tions, we will lose no tLme in procuring the necessary equipmrents for your campaign.",Ferdinand. thanked his brother warmly at the momernt; but after he had retired to reft, and began to reflei on every occurrence, there appeared, he thought, an indecent eagerness in Rhodophil to haften his depar- ture: At first he told me I Ihould puffefs an equal flare of my late father's fortune; the ferv.ir:s were told they had two matiers, and equai power was to be lodged in my hands. 'Tis true I had no right to expet it, yet why make such liberal offers, when the tenor of his condut, and the behaviour of,the 2
the servants are contradi&ory, when every thing he does carries the air of a favour, and every attendance in the servants is ushered in with " my master ordered me to do this, or that?" yet, perhaps, I am capricious, my situation is delicate, and my mind, from a long habitude of discontent, may fee things with a jaundiced eye, which in themselves bear a very different interpretation : Let me not be unjust in my surmises, for surely the Count has been ever warmly my friend, nor is it his fault that Iam cut offfrom a participation of my father's fortune. How few half bro- thers would have ated like Rhodophil! - Alhamed of his first uneasy doubts, Ferdinand turned eagerly to the bright fide of his bro- ther's characer, and did him more thanjuftice from an apprehension that he had done him less.,The next morning, taking his accustomed walk, he met Ernest, anxious to ease the heart of his old friend, and do credit to his brother, he repeated the conversation on the,·& ~ preceding
preceding evening. Ernest heard him with attention, and made the following reply : - " You will, I am sure, Sir, do justice to my heart, and believe that I am neither preju- diced against my master, the Count, nor naturally suspicious. I speak from the best grounds, and it is with pain I destroy the opinion you entertain of his affetion and honour; but I must develope the teeming generosity that captivates your mind. Count Rhodophil has learned the courtly art of pro- fecfing much and meaning little, which gives consequence to himself, and fends the poor deluded expectant away to indulge visionary hopes, and be again deceived by smooth words that mean nothing.",That well remembered day, which cut you off from all legal claims on your father's fortune, never [hall I forget the consequential air, the parade with which the domestics were informed that they had two maiters.- " Stop, Ernest (cried Ferdinand) do not fully the generosity of my brother, by im-,puting
p!ling to iim such despicable motives as piuce and kiicccnfequence; it ill becomes me to hear cne cf his family rob him of the rr.erit due to so mn ch fianknefs and brotherly love: I cannot fuffcr you to proceed in this strain.",(' Were I b:fe enough to be unjust, or speak from the prejudices of my own opinion, I hould be deserving of your displeasure, Sir, but I entreat you to hear me without interruption, and then I will submit to your judgment.","c Well, well (returned he) rather a little displeased) you may go on."," That day, Sir (proceeded Ernest) after you had received such proofs of his affection, and returned to your miserable abode with an intention to fetch your Lady, I withdrew to an apartment, which I gave orders to have fitted up for you. The good old house- keeper, Madam Lambert was with me: - You know, Sir, it adjoins to the old library, and was, I believe, the cause why the books have been since removed i but, however, not,tQ
to be tedious (here Ferdinand smiled) there we were, when presently the Count entered the library with Peter; they were speaking as they slut the door; we heard your name mentioned, and I put my finger to my mouth; we were silent and listened. I fee, Sir, you look displeased; it was a liberty and a mean- ness if I could not justify it to my own heart, but I had my reasons.," Well, Sir, we heard Count Rhodophil fay, ' the world has in general thought my father very cruel in his treatment of Ferdi- nand, his whole fortune being given to me, they would be apt to censure and fufpeat me of taking an advantage of his resentments; it is therefore to avoid any unpleasant re- flections, to do away any prejudices that might be conceived against me, and to hum- b)J Ferdinand's spirit into a sense of obliga- tion, added to another view I look forward to still more gratifying, that I have made him and his family an offer of my house, which perhaps he will presume from what I said just now, to think is to be his also; but I,was
was before determined how to aat: I ihall, by degrees, change every servant but your- self; Ernest I ihall be obliged to keep until all his accounts are made up, but no longer; then the succeeding domestics, ignorant of my present declaratio,, and taught to believe highly of my generosity in supporting a bro- ther's family, will learn to estimate us pro- perly, and treat him accordingly.'," This, Sir, was verbatim your brother's speech, which Peter applauded in very free words I thought for a servant, and we stole softly out of the room left we should be dif- covered. You must have observed, Sir, the servants are all changed, on one pretence or other, and being done without consulting you, proves how little equality of power you have in the house. Madame Lambert went two days ago; my turn will soon come; in truth but for you I care not how soon but I believe your intention of going into the army has greatly rejoiced him, as it pro- cures your absence without any refle&ion being thrown on him. Peter has of late,paid
paid much court to me, but as I look upon him to be in the plot against you,'I have taken very little notice of him. Two or three times he has remarked, ' how very melancholy Mr. Ferdinand looked !' - I thought something might be gathered from him of his master's intentions towards your family, so yesterday I threw myself in his way after I had left you; and your Lady passing into the garden, I observed how handfotne the was, and what beautiful chil- dren Master and Miss were; adding, ' that it was a pity but some settlement was made for them, left the Count should marry, and his Lady not happen to like his brother's family."-As to marriage (said he) I believe my master don't think of that, and I dare fay he will always be kind to Madame Clau- dina, if ihe is civil to him, so it muff be her own fault if fle loses his favour. As to set- tlement, Mr. Ernest, master knows better than that, make folks independent, and you make them saucy and ungrateful, whilst they are obliged to you they will be humble, tho',I
I fancy my master would have no objection to put forth a little to fend his brother in some place abroad, for to be sure it is a ihame to fee a young man idling at home, who has nothing of his own, and hanging upon a generous Gentleman, who is but a half-bro- ther after all, and not obliged to maintain him." I was so provoked at his impudence that I could have throttled the rascal; but I curbed my passion, and faying, " Very true, Peter," turned short from him, and retired to my room. " Now, Sir, putting all this together, what muff you think of the Count ?",Ferdinand, who was walking rather before Ernest, and his head hanging on his breast, turned round suddenly, with a look that ex- pressed a thousand contending passions, twice he opened his lips to speak, but the conflia in his mind precluded all powers of articu- lation, and he gladly availed himfelfof a feat which just then appeared in view, though only the root of a tree, to fit down, for his trembling limbs could no longer support,him.
him. Poor Ernest saw, with infinite concern, the effects of his intelligence; tears stood glistening in his aged eyes. -"My dear master (said he) resume your courage; let not the machinations of the wicked have power to wring your noble heart with for- row, to shake your fortitude, which has already struggled through the bitterest trou- bles."," Ernest (said Ferdinand, after a long pause) you have bereft me of my last and only hope; all the consolation I could look forward to in life must derive its source from my brother. My brother did I fay ? alas ! if what you tell me is true, and surely you would not deceive me, I have no longer a brother. Count Rhodophil is my father's heir, and I am cast off for ever. 0, what a blffing is ignorance! Yesterday I thought myself wretched, but it was a slate of bliss to what I now feel; my head burns like fire. Oh! my old, and now my only friend, tel me where, where shall I fly to, now that all my visionary hopes of this morning are va-,nilled
nifhed into bubbles! My wife ! my children! merciful Heaven! who will provide for them ?" "," hat Heaven you invoke (answered the fieward;) fear not, Sir, Providence never deserts the virtuous man. " But what, what is now to become of my intended expedi- tion to the army ?",c If I may be so bold as to offer my advice (replied Ernest) I would aft as if I was still unacquainted with the Count's real character; I only wilhed, Sir, to put you on your guard against duplicity, and not to have you weighed down with an idea of obliga- tions which proceed only from selfish confi- derations. Whatever advantages you receive from the Count, is your undoubted right, as children of the fame father you have an equal claim to his property; nor could resentment be justifiable carried to such lengths, as to consign one child to misery, that the other might riot in luxury."," Surely, Ernest (cried Ferdinand) my father had a right to make what distinctions he pleated."
I cannot think so, Sir (returned the other) in sudden anger was that will made, and I am confident it was intended to be altered, unhappily it was delayed until too late. Think of the words ' Pardon and peace !' Believe me, Sir, my blefled matker never died with hatred in his heart: Be not scrupulous therefore, but take, without hefi- tation, what the Count offers you, and boldly ask for some certain income for your Lady; he cannot, I think, refufei if he does, he unmasks himself at once."," What! (exclaimed Ferdinand) receive, nay, even ask favours from a man whom I fufpeEt of the vilest duplicity; owe pecuniary obligations, the existence of my family to.","Softly, Sir (said Ernest) it is a ihare of your father's property, asjuch receive it freely. I beseech you, Sir, to keep what I have told you in your mind; but do not let it influence your a&tions to the disadvantage of yourself and family.",VOL. i. D The
nifhed into bubbles! My wife ! my children! merciful Heaven! who will provide for them?" "," That Heaven you invoke (answered the steward;) fear not, Sir, Providence never deserts the virtuous man. " But what, what is now to become of mynintended expedi. tion to the army ?"," If I may be so bold as to offer my advice (replied Ernet) I would aa as if I was still unacquainted with the Count's real character; I only wished, Sir, to put you on your guard againif duplicity, and not to have you weighed down with an idea of obliga- tions which proceed only from selfish confi- derations. Whatever advantages you receive from the Count, is your undoubted right, as children of the fame father you have an equal claim to his property; nor could resentment be justifiable carried to such lengths, as to consign one child to misery, that the other might riot in luxury."," Surely, Ernest (cried Ferdinand) my father had a right to make what diftincions he pleased."
·" I cannot think so, Sir (returned the other) in sudden anger was that will made, and I am confident it was intended to be altered, unhappily it was delayed until too late. Think of the words ' Pardon and peace !' Believe me, Sir, my blessed master never died with hatred in his heart: Be not scrupulous therefore, but take, without hefi- tation, what the Count offers you, and boldly ask for some certain income for your Lady; he cannot, I think, refuse; if he does, he unmaiks himself at once.",M" What! (exclaimed Ferdinand.) receive, nay, even ask favours from a man whom I fufpeat of the vilest duplicity; owe pecuniary obligations, the existence of my family to."," Softly, Sir (said Ernest) it is a share of- yourfather's property, asfuch receive it freely. I beseech you, Sir, to keep what I have told you in your mind ; but do not let it influence your actions to the disadvantage of yourself and family.",VOL. I. D The
The appearance of Rhodophil and Clau- dina at a distance interrupted their conver- fation. Ferdinand arose, and walked hastily into the forest, unable to meet them in the present perturbed state of his mind. He re- volved every thing Ernest had told him; he recolle&ed a thousand little inattentions he had received; the air of protection his bro- ther often assumed, the change in the house- hold, his readiness to lay hold of the little inclination he had shewn for the army: In short, the more he reflected, the more he was convinced no real brotherly affecion existed in the bosom of Rhodophil: " Yet, (exclaimed he) did he not shew us a thou- sand ats of kindness, when finking under the displeasure of my father ? Did he not often relieve us from want, and labour incessantly to bring about a reconciliation ? And is it possible that a sudden change of fortune, be- ing possessed of all, should make such a revolution in his principles ? If so, alas ! how dangerous is prosperity ? What a contractor of the heart is wealth,!',Diftra&ed
Diftraced with the various conjeEtures that occupied his mind, he walked on regardless of time or distance, until faint and weary, he flopped, and looked round, that he might trace his way back; but he had bewildered himself among the trees, and observed no particular path, he therefore was at a loss how to regain the dire&t road ; to complete his difficulties, the air grew dark, the clouds heavy, and in a short time it began to rain violently. Scarcely sensible of the torrents that poured upon him, Ferdinand fought to explore his way to the Castle, though he dreaded to encounter the looks of its master. It was some hours, however, before he saw the turrets rising above the trees, and when arrived at the garden, he was so exhausted with fatigue, so drenched with the rain, that it was with much difficulty he reached the saloon door before his senses fled, and he fell extended on the floor. Happily a ser- vant was pafling the room, and hearing a noise, opened the door, and beheld the life- less body.,D 2 His
His exclamations soon brought every one to know the cause, and poor Claudina was nearly distracted with terror and anxiety. - He was soon restored to his senses, and im- mediately put into a warm bed, and through the attention of his wife and old Ernest (who was terrified to death at an accident, of which he thought himself in a great measure the cause) after some hours he grew better, and able to account for his indisposition, by mentioning the length of his walk through the rain. He endeavoured to aflame a com- pofure in his behaviour to his brother that surprised even Ernest, and having taken his resolution, he stifled his feelings, and con- ducted himself as usual. A violent cold and fever were the consequences of his ramble, and for several days he was quite an invalid, and in some danger, during this time Rhodophil behaved with the utmost tender- ness, which made him doubt the communi- cations of Ernest, and to fufpec the justice of his own observations.,The
The first day that he left his bed, the Count came to him in a transport of joy: - " My dear Ferdinand, we are fuccesfiul, I have this moment received an express, your commission is granted, and the Emperor wishes to fee you without delay. I am happy, my dear brother, in being the messenger of such agreeable and wilhed-for intelligence.",The agitations of Ferdinand were inex- preffible; he hesitated whether he ihould accept or refute the commirffon procured for him. The Count seemed surprised : " You are silent, my dear brother, have your senti- ments undergone any change that I am unacquainted with ?"," They have indeed, (answered Ferdi- nand, with a deep sigh;) the danger I was 'in a few days since has alarmed me for the future welfare of my family. I know well (added he, fixing his eyes steadily on Rho- dophil, whose own fell under the penetrating glance) how much I may depend upon your brotherly kindnes; but you may marry, little,D 3 occurrences
occurrences may arise at present unforeseen to interrupt the harmony that exists in your family, and the idea of a precarious and ac- cidental provision, mnuf ever give pain to a feeling heart.",(" What is it you mean or expel. ?" asked the Count, in a quick tone.,c" A small settlement on my wife, that I may depart with a certainty that, whether I live or die, she will not want the common necessaries of life; superfluities, such as she now enjoys, I neither expet or wish for."," What then (cried Rhodophil) you will not trust to my honour, or affe&ion for yolr family ?",( Be not offended (answered Ferdinand, calmly) and I will be explicit; for my own provision, my sword shall carve it out, and for my family I expe& only a mediocrity of fortune. The grandeur and elegance that reigns here they are not entitled to, nor can they expect a continuance of; a more hum- ble situation is most proper for them: If therefore you will fettle a very moderate pen-,sion
sion upon my wife and children, I will place them in some decent cottage suitable to their fortunes, and then I shall depart in peace.",The countenance of Rhodophil underwent many changes whilst his brother was speaking, nor was his answer quite ready when he stop- ped. At last, "I know not (replied he) whether I should be most grieved or offended at your unaccountable proposition. Is not Claudina my sifter ? Are not your children my heirs? I never intend to marry; but supposing I should, would not my honour and fraternal affetion compel me to make a handsome provision for you and your fa- mily ?"," A handsome provision I neither expect nor am entitled to (answered Ferdinand.) In this commission, you have procured for me, lies the extent of my wilhes for myself. My wife has no right to splendid expectations, and my children ihall be taught by industry to provide for themselves. The greatest misery of life is to be accustomed in early,D 4 youth
youth to indulgences which enervate both the mind and body, and lead to hopes which may be blighted by a thousand accidents.- My children shall indulge no hopes indepen- dent of their own exertions, and that I am convinced is the surest road to competency and happiness.",c" What, then (said the Count) you would bring them up to trade, to disgrace their. family ?",: No (replied Ferdinand, warmly) I will, if I live, prevent them from disgracing their family, by teaching them a spirit of inde- pendence, and a mediocrity of expectations; their minds shall be noble, though their for- tunes may be humble; they shall be superior to base ations from an integrity of heart; and capable of providing for their own main- tenance, they never can disgrace their con- nexions, though they may mortify pride.",(c Your language and sentiments are very strange (replied Rhodophil, in a tone of pique and vexation;) but methinks you promise too much for your children, whose ideas may,not
not happen to coincide with your's." -," At least," said Ferdinand, " I will en- deavour to inculcate my sentiments, and form their young minds agreeable to my wishes; there is no dependance upon the human heart it is true: I may fail of success, but I will not abate of my endeavours; the reft I must leave to Providence."," Well," returned Rhodophil, " since you have no reliance on me, and insist upon an independence,befogoodtoname your terms." The spirit of Ferdinand revolted against this demand, and he was on the point of refusing every assistance; but the recolle&ion of his family timely interposed, and - with evident reluctance he named.. four hundred crowns yearly.'",", Four hundred. crowns !" repeated the Count, with surprise,." why, such a fum will scarcely find them bread!" "It is double, how- ever; to any advantages I have had for them for those last two years, and I should despise myfelfif I confidered your fortune more than their, real wants.",D 5 "You
" You are much too moderate," said the Count; " but I will enter into a compro- mise with you; I will fettle that fum upon them during their residence in this Castle,. and double it should I marry; but then I expea that you will permit them to remain here in your absence, during your first cam- paign. Deprive me not of all. my comforts atonce; let me sooth the sorrows of my sifter on your first reparation; your children are too young to imbibe anyprejudices against your intended frugal system, and I expe&, as a proof of your brotherly affection, that those sweet pledges of your dearest love may be confided to me.",Ferdinand hesitated a little, but at length said, equivocally, "Your kindness is truly painful to me, but Claudina {hall decide on this point; and now my wish,. as to a small provision for them being generously acceded to, I have only to haften preparations for my departure."," A frnall provision, indeed !" repeated the Count, " however, it will be always in,my
my power to augment it, for I hall ever confider we have equal claims to the fortune of our ancestors.",He now withdrew at Ferdinand's request to reveal every particular to Claudina, and left him variously affeaed by the preceding conversation. " If I have wronged him by giving credit to erroneous reports, or fufpi- cious observations, I must. appear as an un- grateful and most. unworthy charaCer; and ought I to believe the perhaps mistaken representation of Ernest against .a series of kind .ations, particularly within those last two years, when interest could have no share in directing them to me, then under my father's malediCtion ? .Good Heavens ! if I ,have- wronged him, how shall I detest my- self!" For some time Ferdinand dwelt on every favourable. fide. of his brother's cha- rater with felf-indignation, but. soon other ideas obtruded. . If he really. had been sincere. in the equality he talked of, would he not :bave seized the first moment to ensure it to,D 6 nme?
me ? Would he not have hastened to relieve me from a sense of obligations by nobly making me independent, and rendering my reparation from my family unnecessary? - Could he not have resigned over one of his estates to me as a residence I might have called my own ? Does he seem to have a feeling heart, or regret the loss of a parent ever good and bountiful to him ? Has he not discharged the old servants, grown grey in the service of the family, with only the small legacies (much less, indeed, than I expected the munificent Ipirit' of my father would have bequeathed to them) to infufficiern for the support of their old age ? Are'not there many proofs of a heart deficient in genero- fity, and a right way of thinking ? Tor- mented by these and many other doubts, he exclaimed, " Would to Heaven I could read his heart, that I might do him justice !" A deep and hollow voice cried, " It is a corrupt one! ! !",Ferdinand sprung from his feat, looked wildly round the room: "Astonishing ! (he,....a. cried)
cried) again that voice, sure it is, it muif be, -more than human !" He opened the door that led into the next apartment; the room was empty, and universal silence reigned':- Again he reseatcd himself, in trembling ex- .pecation of the fame founds, but he heard no more. Extremely agitated, though he endeavoured to assume a composed air, he feebly crept to the drefling room of Claudina, where he found the Count. His blood grew chill at the fight; both ilarted, and exclaimed :at his. appearance; with difficulty he sup- ported himself till assisted by his wife to a chair; she blamed him for attempting to leave his apartment: "You are too weak .(said fle) to walk as yet; I was coming to .you," .. . I shall soon :recover (replied he)'and gain strength by the change of air; I already. .feel better."' - .,Indeed, the first shock being over, though :the.voice fiill vibrated on his ear, he viewed Rhodophil with a scrutinizing eye, and traced, ,. :.3 as
as he thought, duplicity in every line of his countenance, so governed are our ideas by accidental circumfiances ! His love, his re- verence for his brother,. Ihrunk into nothing, and he believed the voice of the dead against all those superficial appearances which had hitherto lulled him into an unfufpeaing con- fidence. After a short pause, " I have been complying with your wishes, my dear bro- ther," said the Count, " and had just opened the business to your wife as you appeared.","Ah ! Ferdinand," cried Claudina, " can you think of .leaving me, of exposing your life to the uncertain chance of war ?",".The hand of Providence is there, is here, and.every where," answered Ferdinand. " Fear not for me, my dear Claudina, divest. yourself of.prejudice, confider, my situation dispassionately, and you will be reconciled to. an inevitable neceffity.-I leave .you," :said the Count, " to discuss the subje6t between yourselves my :prayers and wihes have been unsuccessful, you, Madam. may. have mot influence." He bowed, and ieft the room.,CHAP.
CHAP.. IV.. FOR.a few moments they were filnt;,at length Ferdinand. explained to her.-- his motives without.entering into any:, ftric-, tures on his brother's. condut ;..and. by the. arguments he. adduced in support of.his plan,. brought her to be. convinced ,or. at-.leaft to appear convinced, that he was perfectly right. He mentioned his intention, to take a finall. cottage for her and his children, at the fame time that he told her of the Count's wishes that the: would remain at the Castle.-" On this head, my dear Claudina, your inclina- tions Ihall decide, for I wish to leave you,perfectly 6
perfectly contented with your situation in my absence, determine therefore as you feel most inclined."," I own, then," answered the, that I prefer Raying here; to remove into a strange house, among strange people, unaccustomed to manage for myfelt; would be altogether unpleasant. Here, as our good brother so- licits our Ray, I can at least be as comforta- ble as it is possible I can be in your absence, and make myself useful enough to do away any sense of obligation.","As you please, so let it be," returned. Ferdinand, rather hurt at her choice,. but determined not to controul her,. " and. I hope a few days will finiih all our prepara- tions, and give me strength to repair to Vienna." A further conversation took place relative to domeefic. matters; but he cauti-. oufly concealed the two extraordinary occur- rences that had befallen him, because he had. never yet undeceived her, with refpet. to the: pardon which, ihe believed, the late Count had accorded to him before his death,..,In
In the course of the evening Ferdinand saw Ernest, and related to him, not only what had pass between his brother and himself, but the words which he had a second time heard in his apartment. " It was the fame voice that I heard before in the room where my father's body lay. You, Ernefs, will believe me, to no one else would I mention the cir- cumftance, for from no one else should I gain credit; but it is wonderous strange !"," True, Sir," answered the iteward; "but nothing is impossible, and now forewarned, you may guard against any evil practices. - Would to Heaven my wife had otherwise. decided," cried Ferdinand.," Do not be uneasy, Sir," replied Ernest, <( whilst I have life and limbs I will be faith- ful to your family, nothing shall escape my observation." " But if you should be dif- charged ?"," I have some cause to think that cannot well take place, and should I quit the house, I have an infallible method of knowing what passes here; whilst I live, therefore, you need not fear.",This
This cheerful assurance calmed the tumult of Ferdinand's mind, and enabled him with alacrity to prepare for his journey. The fol- lowing day Ernest waited on him by the Count's order with a handsome fum of money for his necessary expences; the colour mounted to Ferdinand's cheeks, he hesitated, paced about the room, and seemed in violent agitations.-"- Pray, dear Sir," cried Ernest, "take the money, think of it less as your brother's present, than as a small part of your father's property, to which you have un- questionably a right."," Not so," replied Ferdinand, "I can have no right to what he has bequeathed from me, and to receive pecuniary favours from a man I think capable of duplicity, lowers me in my own esteem.",1" Be not so scrupulous, Sir, I beseech you," returned Ernest; "take it, fortune may enable you to return it, and I'll pledge my life you will not hereafter regret accepting the money, or think much of the obligation as you call it.","You
" You persuade me," said Ferdinand, "and against my inclinations I comply; then feeing the largeness of the fum, good Heavens! can this man have a bad heart ? Is there not munificence in this present ? 0, Rhodophil, if concurrent circumfiances have led me into an error, if I injure you by doubt and fufpi- cion, how severe will be my repentane !"- Ernest was silent, indeed he could not view the necessary arrangements for the departure of a man le loved and revered, without feeling the deepef sorrow; yet he thought the plan he had adopted was most suitable to his birth, his age and situation, and therefore only regretted the necessity for its execution, whilst Ferdinand painfully looking forward to the hour of reparation from a wife and chil- dren that he doated on, fought, in the bufle of preparation, to blunt the severity of his feelings.,The day of parting at length arrived, and as such scenes can afford no gratification to,minds
minds of sensibility, we ihall not dwell upon them: Sorrow was reciprocal on, all fides, at least to appearance, and we cannot pene- trate into the remotest corner of the heart, therefore give those appearances due credit. To follow Ferdinand would be unnecessary, we lhall then take this opportunity to look back into the family history of his father, the late Count Renaud.,CHAP.
CHAP. V. DESCENDED from a noble and an,opulent family, Count Renaud fuc- ceeded to the estates of his ancestors at the age of five-and-twenty : Two years previous to which he had, to please his family, married a Lady of noble birth and great riches, her only recommendations. Proud, fastidious, and violent, she fought, by the haughtiness of her demeanour, to exaEt that refpea and servility as substitutes for veneration and esteem, to which her manners and conduct laid no claims. The Count, who had another attachment, conscious that he was deficient,in
in tenderness to her, and afraid of irritating a spirit so ungovernable by any opposition to her plans, quietly permitted her to conduct his household as she pleased, nor ever inter- sered with her pursuits or expences. Nearly at the fame period, when he came into the possession of his father's fortune, his wife presented him with an heir in the person of Rhodophil. The birth of a son made him for some time more attentive to his Lady, but his affetion for a dearer object oon drew him into his customary distant civili- ties. Happily the Countess had no violent fufceptibilides, her heart had never been softened by love, and though she was often provoked at the negle&c of her Lord, yet her feelings arose more from disappointed pride, than from any warmth of affection, confe- quently, though displeased, she was not grieved, and offended pride found a relief in the impcrioufnefs of her manners to all those who were fubjeted to her caprice.,When
When her son was about a twelvemonth old, a young Lady, who was a near relation to the Countess, and had just been liberated from a convent where she had resided from childhood for education, came to pay them a visit: She was received with kindness by the Countess, with politeness by the Count; but in less than a fortnight the sentiments of both parties underwent a total alteration.,Caroline, the name of this young Lady, had one of the finest forms imagination could paint; her face was handsome, her air and manners captivating, from a certain kind of bathfil naivete which joined to a natural elegance, was extremely fascinating. At first fight you admired her, on an acquaintance an unprejudiced mind muff love her. By imperceptible degrees, even to himself, the Count grew enchanted with the charms of Caroline, he delighted in her society; she was sensible, gentle, and unassuming; she was to him a new characer; his Lady proud of her birth and riches, with a natural vio-,lence
lence of temper, and devoid of personal attractions, was more than indifferent; she was disgusting to him: His mistress, vain of her charms, conscious of the power she had long held over his affections, and which had received additional itrength from the birth of a daughter, had for some time past relaxed in her endeavours to please, and by her little solicitude to amuse him in those hours which he devoted to her, had insensibly weakened her powers of attraction, and rendered the visits he paid her rather a retreat from the more disagreeable society at the Castle, than the effects of that violent passion he had once and for a long while felt for her, and which, perhaps, only her own folly and caprice caused ai abatement of.,His passions were therefore in that dor. mant state which of all others is the most dangerous in a susceptible mind, because, if once routed into action, they blaze 'with more uncontrolled fury than when kept in conifant agitation. Such was the Count's situation,when
when first Caroline became an inmate in his house; nor did her person at first fight ap- pear particularly charming; he fought her company and conversation more as a pleating variety than from any expectation of delight; but a short time convinced him how dange- rous an indulgence was the society of a young and beautiful girl, who, new to the world, was grateful for the attentions he paid her, pleased with his conversation, and defi- rous of profiting by the information his understanding daily unfolded to her. Every hour her attractions gained upon his heart, and he was sensible that he had conceived a pafilon more delicate and violent than any he had ever before admitted to his bosom,,Unhappily the young and inexperienced Caroline caught the infection, the contagion spread itself through her innocent mind, and the grew melanch yly and unhappy; for a long time insensible of the nature ,'f her disease, until one morning that f. me un-" guarded expressions, and too tender looks of,VOL. I. E the
the Count, too fully explained his sentiments, and taught her to develop the secret of her own. Extremely Ihocked at the discovery, when ihe withdrew to her apartment she took herself severely to task for her involun- tary crime, and directly determined to quit the house, and fly the dangerous society of its master. Whilst the was forming this pru- denr resolution the Countess entered her apartment, her features deformed by passion, her eyes flashing fire: "' Insolent, depraved, ungrateful girl!" exclaimed the, ( so, you have formed a vile intrigue with my husband; under a pretence of visiting me you carry on your Ihamelels connexion in my very house. Abandened wretch! I have seen, I have heard enough; you shall quit it this day, base as you are, I will expose you to my servants, to your friends, and to the world.",She was stopped in the midif of her threats by feeing the unhappy girl fall senseless at her feet. She rang the bell for assistance, but on the entrance of the servants continued her,exclamations
exclamations and upbraidings. " Recover the infamous creature who has so barely in. jured me; pack up her rags, and the moment her senses return, turn her out of the houle to her base paramour my husband, whom the has seduced from me. I have discovered their intrigue, nor shall Ihe sleep again under this roof. Disobey me atyour peril," said she to the servants, who flood aghast at her fury; c' let her be thruit out from my house within this hour." She flew out of the room at the moment when returning life visited the cheeks of the much-injured Caroline.,She opened her eyes and beheld the servants; ffe looked with terror relnd the room, her. ears still holding the dreadful words which had deprived her of her senses. Seeing only the two women who looked on her with compassion, though believing her guilty: " Am I a base, infamous wretch ?" said she: "' Is my character loft, my innocence blasted, by vile fufplcions? 0, Heavens! what is to become of me, injured and un-,E a done,
done, whither can I fly ? But no, I will not go, 1 will fee the Countess, she must, she ihall hear me. I am inrocent, indeed I am>" added the, burfling into a torrent of tears that greatly asseted the women, who endea- voured to tooth her into a composure impof- fible to be obtained. One of them, more courageous than the other, offered to go in search of her Lady, and entreat an audience for the poor afflicted.-" No," said ihe, rising hastily from the bed, " I will not entreat, I will demand to be heard, and you shall ac- company me." She rather flew than walked towards the Countels's dressing room, who was at that moment abusing her in the vilest terms to her own woman. Caroline burst into the room, surprise chained the Countess to her chair, and stopped her tongue.," Hear me, Madam," said file; ( it is a justice I demand; you have accused, con- demned, and intulted me with the charge of crimes my foul abhors: You seek to mur- der my future happiness by destroying my,reputation.
reputation. You are deceived and abused. Neither my condut or sentiments ever injured you, and the infamous accusation of an in- trigue with your husband is as false as 1 leaven is true to that Heaven I appeal for my in- nocence and integrity. I will leave your house, but not as a guilty wretch, nor until my uncle arrives to take me hence confine me to this room if you please, I will only fee the Count once more, and that mhall be in your presence: He will do me justice; but youj all rot drive me from hence until you have recalled your accusations, and that I can depart with a chara&ter unspotted, as my heart is unstained, with guilt.",That the Countess heard herfo long without interruption proceeded not from patience, or a desire of hearing her in her own defence: On the contrary, surprise and increasing rage precluded speech for a few moments; but just as Caroline pronounced the last words, the sprang forwards, and struck her so violent a blow as laid her on the floor, and would,E 3 have
have trampled upon her, had not the women with-held her by violence. The noise of the fall, her rage, and the screams of the servants, alarmed the whole household, and the Count, who had jut entered from the garden, hearing and feeing the confusion, ran up stairs with them to learn the occasion. What were his emotions on entering his wife's dreffing-room, to behold Caroline on the floor weltering in her blood, and the Coun- tefs foaming, stamping with rage, and ftrug- gling with her servants.,He flew to the senseless Caroline: " My God ! what-how is this ? Is she killed?" he was going to fay; but overpowered, he funk into a chair, whilst those that had followed him raised the poor girl from the sloop, and said, the blood proceeded from her nose. - The women, who held the Coun'tess, now gave way to her ungovernable rage, and car- ried off the poor vitim of it to another room. The . ock actually suspended all powers in the Count, and he looked on his,wist
wife with an air of stupid wildness. She, mistaking the cause of his silence, vented her passion in such language, and spoke of Ca- roline in such infamous, opprobrious terms, that he was no longer at a loss to account for the feene he had witnessed. He started up like a mad-man, seizing her hands, he forced her into a chair: " Sit there, Madam," he cried, in a voice choaked with rage and hor- ror; " Stir not for your life till I have seen that angel you have so basely injured: Yes, .he is an angel, innocent and spotless; dare not to quit this apartment. When I have seen the injured Caroline I Thall know what treatment you deserve." He quitted the room, and on entering the apartment where the unhappy girl was carried, found her restored to her senses, and the blood stopped; but she had a violent bruise on the fide of her head, and another on her S(oulder; ihe was incapable of speaking, and whilst she was conveyed to bed, and a surgeon was sent for, the Count was nearly diftrafted. One of the women gave him complete information of,E 4 the
the preceding scenes, which threw him into paroxifms of rage little lhort of madness. - He a thousand times protefied the innocence of Caroline, and execrated her malicious accufcrs. Not a servant in the house but believed him, for her gentle, unofending manners had g;iincd her as much love and refpeft amongfc them, as the Countess was beheld with hatred and dread.,But little refpe&t or attachment can be ex- pented from domestics, when their principals degrade themfclves by the exercise of info- lence and pafion over those whose humble situation in life is perhaps the only circum- fiance in which they are inferior to their employers; for goodness of heart, and noble- ness of principle, are by no means confined to the rich and titled, who derive their boasted superiority too often more from hereditary claims than from their own personal rights.,The Countess had fervanis, but she had no friends, and her ill humour and insolence,was
was borne by them, because from habitude they had learned to despise it. Their master they loved, and a simple asseveration from him gained more credit than oaths, or the most plausible testimony could obtain for their Lady : No wonder, therefore, that every one was attentive to the unfortunate young Lady, and anxious for the arrival of the fur- geon; he at length appeared, and to their great joy declared no material injury had been received, the bruises he hoped soon to remove, but the great loss of blood, and a tremor which he supposed was owing to the fall, rendered it necessary that the patient should be kept exceeding quiet. A little more composed by this report, the Count returned to his wife, whose rage had been succeeded by a fit offullennefs and refledions not very pleasant.,With very little ceremony he reproached her warmly for her inhuman treatment of Caroline, vindicated her innocence with energy and truth; insisted that she ihould publicly,E 5 ask
ask her pardon for the insults (he had given her, or be assured that he would instantly separate himself from her for ever, and do justice to the chara&er of a young Lady she had so wantonly injured, without the least provocation. Not deigning to make any reply, she drew from her pocket a letter, and gave it into his hand. How great was his astonishment to fee, in spite of an endea- vour to disguise it, the hand-writing of his mistress, who, as a friend to the Countess, accused her husband and Caroline of an in- trigue, and repeated a number of bitter expressions, which had lometimes been drawn. from him relative to his wife's person and disposition, as if spoken by him to Caroline, and by her repeated to her."-The whole information was calculated to inspire every diabolical idea that jealohfy, personal resent- ment, and a sense of vile- ingratitude, could animate a naturally irritable temper to in- dulge,,He
He ,put cir oe tpaer iJ ijis pocket:-" I know your . tckcd ii;formant,' said he, " and ihe ihall dea-l; repent the baseness of this attempt, to injure a charafhtr superior to the machinations of persons who hate the virtue they cann.t copy. lThis Itrcer, M4adam, in a imall dcgree, might excuse youi flfpicions; but nothing can atone fur your improper and cruel treatment of a young wuman, who, as a relation and a guest, had a claim to your hospitality."," What !" interrupted the Countess, in- dignantly, " when I was informed Jhe had violated the rights you talk of, and injured me irreparably ?"," At least," answered the Count, " you ought to have shewn this letter to her or to me,. to have judged, from your own convic- tion, before you took the liberty of being your own avenger, and not blindly have per- mitted your passions to be guided by a vile incendiary, and proceed to fueh outrages as the lowest of your sex fhouid be ashamed of: However, Madam, you have fill the power,E6 to,
to atone for your aspersions on the young Lady's fame before your servants by a public recantation. The personal injury, the de- grading blow, it is pofible bhe may forgive; but if you have any feeling, you can never forgive youtielf.",Ending those words he left her, and went to the house of his mistress, where he had not been for several days: To his afconifhment he found it shut up, and on inquiry learned, that the Lady, with her child and nurse, had gone from thence two days before; that the furniture had been privately disposed of, and that a Gentleman came in a carriage and took them from the house without any one's know- ing to what place they were gone. This information hurt the Count much, not on account of the Lady, who had been some time indifferent to him, but he was fond of the infant, and to have it taken away, solely in the power of a woman whose principles were not virtuous, distressed him greatly; and he painfully felt that the errors he had,committed
committed might too probably be retaliated on his own child, and that he had given ex- iftence to a being who might fall a victim to the vices of another, with passions as un- governable as his own!,The conviction struck him with shame and remorse; he returned to the Castle over- whelmed with dejection, and more than ever anxious that the characer of Caroline should be jutified, that fje might not be a sufferer through his attachment, which, however care- fully concealed, it was evident, the jealous curiosity of his miltrefs had penetrated into, and poffibiy others might have made the fame observations, though not impelled by the fame motives. In confcquence of theie refleclions, he fought a conversation with his Lady; to her he confessed the nature of his long attachment to his late mistress, the birth of a daughter, his growing indifference, and little attention to her for some time pat-, which he supposed had induced her from pique and revenge, to give her the informa-,tion
tionl contained, in that lett- r Ifie had delivered to him, in the hpe of crK'ating jealousies and difturbanccs to ctX.bitter cheer future days."," You ;ell me rothing, Sir," anfwcred she hauhit ly, " but what I have long since been infc-med of, except who was the writer of the letter; the conjeEtre is not wholly improbable, nor the motives which gave rife to it, at all unlikely. My passions carried me beyond the bounds of decency when I firuck Caroline; but 1-e intruded at an im- proper time, and was the sufferer. I have no chjecion to accede to your proposition,. and declare her innocence as far as my own belief goes ; buE I expec that letter (hall be produced as mj juftificatinn. You fee, Sir, to what meannesses you subjea me by your attachments; I expeat this to be the last folly of the kind; if you chufe to make yourself ridiculous, I desire to be left out of the business.",She left the room with an air of disdain and superiority, that convinced him conceflions,on..
on his part only served to make her more arrogant. In a few days Caroline was per- fetly recovered; she sent for the Count and Countess to her apartment, the firit time the had admitted either from the day of the quarrel.," I expect my uncle," said the, " tomor- row to take me fi-om this house, which I hourly regret I ever visited! Your unjust suspicions and cruel accusations have wounded my character, have injured my health; but I take God to witness, that I would not be the guilty, ungrateful creature you supposed me for all the enjoyments this world can offer. From you, Madam, I have a right to expect more than an apology, an acknow- ledgment that you have wronged me: Your women heard me accused; it is fit also that they (hould hear me justified."," I own it," replied the Countess, a little asseted, and much conifufed, " I have used you ill, my dear Caroline, I entreat your for- givenefs, and request you will hear the infor-,mation
mation which threw me into passions to inju- rious to you, and unbecoming in myfeif." - She drew the letter from her pocket; Caro- line rejected it. " No, Madam, I am per- fec'iy satisfied; if you believe yourself im- posed upon, if you are convinced that I am incapable of being the wretched creature you fuppoied me to be ; I am restored to your good opinion, and justified in the fight of others; felf-approbation, thank Heaven, I have never forfeited.",The Countess withdrew soon after, the scene was disagreeable to her on many ac- counts; ihe had injured Caroline, and there- fore could not love her; and it likewise gave her a conscious superiority which the Countess could not admit of in any other than her- fclf. The Count was in a situation most deplorable, his love for Caroline exceeded all bouirds, yet refpeEting her with equal ser- vor, he determined to confine his passion within his own bosom, and never to fee her more after she had quitted his house. On,the
the next day, this amiable and unfortunate young woman took leave of the family, car- rying with her a barbed arrow which pierced her heart, and wrung it with sorrow, when the last adieus were pronounced between the Count and herielf. She returned home, but for a long time her days were melancholy, and her nights refflefs.,The Count and his Lady were little lets inhappy; there was nothing refpe&able or estimable in the Lady's character to conciliate esteem, nor any endeavours to render herself pleating. No longer a favourite mistress to engross his hours, his refleEtions on the past were painful, and in profpec no less disagree- able: He grew reserved, solitary and un- happy ; yet behaved with more attention and complacency to his Lady, and was extremely fond of his infant obn. Nine months passed in a dull uniformity, when an accident hap- pened that gave a new turn to his thoughts.,.The
The Countess was again in the family way, and generally went out in the mornings to ride on horseback. One day, when at... tended only by two servants, fre was riuing through the forest not far from the Castle, by the sudden discharge of a gun her horse took fright, and fying between the trees, flhe was thrown off with great violence, and when the attendants came up, lay to all appearance dead. On a nearer inspection they found ihe till breathed; between them fie was conveyed to the Castle, a surgeon was sent for, and the Count seemed greatly asseted, She remained speechless, though sensible, and the surgeon apprehended some very dreadful inward bruises from the fall, which was really the cafe, for in spite of eve-ry medical affif- tance the expired before the next morning.,Having already described the Count's feelings, it is needless to lay, that after the first fnock was over, a thousand pleating images floated on his brain, and every thought was full of Caroline. When decency au-,thorifed
thorifed him to make known the situation of his heart, he applied to that young Lady's uncle for permiflion to address her; an offer so very advantageous could not be refused, and he was permitted to visit her; but, alas 1 how severely was he wounded when he first saw her, pale, emaciated, and dejected; she was no longer the blooming Caroline, whose animated charms had first inspired him with a real paflion; but she was an obje& a thou- sand times more interesting, for all her sus- ferings were on his account, and that idea rendered her inexprelibly dear to him.,Conscious of the alteration in her person, the generous girl decided against her own wishes, and refused to marry him; but the Count was not so easily induced to give up a favourite point so essential to his happiness; her uncle seconded his wishes, and wearied out by his continued perseverance, and yield- ing as well to the tenderness of her own heart, The at length consented; they were,united,
united, and the happy Count thought his felicicy wa5 now complete.,Poor simple mortals as we are ! that fee not by every day's experience how often the accomplishment of our eager wishes proves the source of future misery !,The amiable Caroline was indeed the most desirable of women, the most engaging of wives; but unhappily her cnnftitution had been too delicate to support her under a fatal passion which preyed upon her heart, and for which flie had incessantly reproached herself;- a flow but gentle decay imperceptibly wea- kened her lovely frame. She was sensible of her own situation before she gave her hand to the Count, but was persuaded by her. friends that a happy union might restore her health. For a few weeks Ihe appeared better, and being in the way of becoming a mother, a relapse into weakness, debility and languor, was attributed to that circumstance. She knew better, but ihe suffered them to mif- lead themselves, because she could not bear to fee her friends unhappy. She firuggled,with
with her complaints until the hour arrived when nature made its last efforts, the fame 'moment that gave birth to a son deprived the unhappy Count of its angelic mother, and the spirit of the amiable and too tender Caroline fled to Heaven !,It is impoflible to paint the diftraftion of her miserable husband, who for many days 'was in that dreadful state, to give great cause for apprehension that he would quickly fol- low his beloved wife to the grave; but at length it pleated leaven to reRoie his health, but his vivacity and cheerfulness were fed for ever. He devoted the remainder of his days to the education of his two sons, and the image of his ;oft Caroline was never ab- sent from his thoughts. Sensible that his eldest boy, Rhodophil, would inherit his paternal estates, he determined to iave a handsome fortune for his young Ferdinand, who was the perfet resemblance of his un- fortunate mother. The Count retrenched every useless expence, and though he was benevolent and liberal to others, he denied,himself
himfalf every thing superfluous that he might benefit his darling son, who, as he grew up, discovered every trait of a good heart, and an excellent confitution.,Rhodophil was the counterpart of his mother, both in person and disposition. - Stern, haughty, insolent and unfeeling, no tenderness could move, no remonstrances avail, to make him unbend his temper, and grow more tractable in hisjuvenile days; but when advanced to manhood, he became all at once fond of and submissive to his father, and almost fervilly attentive to his brother, who, open, generous and unfufpeting, really loved Rhodophil, and rejoiced at the altera- tion that appeared to have taken place in his disposition.,CHAP.
CHAP. VI. R HODOPHIL was aboutone- and-twenty,,and Ferdinand in his eighteenth year, when walking one evening in the suburbs of Baden, they met an elderly woman, plainly but cleanly dressed, with a young one by her fide, whose uncommon beauty instantly at- tra&ed the eyes of both the brothers. By mutual content they turned and followed her; they observed them enter a mean-looking house correspondent to their appearance: - Both were eager to make inquiries, and were informed by a neighbour that the woman's name was Dupree, and the young girl, who,was
was her niece, was called Claudina; they had only resided a few months in the town, and appeared to have but a very slender income. With this intelligence they returned home, both thoughtful, and each fuipeting the sentiments of the other, which was, a desire of feeing and khowing a little more of this lovely Claudina.,When they met next morning, Rhodophil began to talk of the " pretty girl" they had seen; but in a lively manner, and in a tone of indifference that surprised Ferdinand, whose young heart had received a first im- preflion, and who could not mention her but in terms of rapture that drew upon him the pleasantry of his brother, Ferdinand, inca- pable of art or difimulation, openly avowed his intention of going in search of another view of his charmer; his brother laughed at his folly, and said he Ihould take a diffe- rent route.,Not to dwell too long on this part of the story, we shall only fay, that Ferdinand found means to get acquainted with this young,Vmoman,
woman, and very soon engaged his heart to her, and acquired no small ihare of her's.- Mean time overtures were made to the woman by a friend of her's tofell her niece, or in other words, the was offered a handsome fum for herself, and a settlement on Claudina by a young Nobleman. Dupree, mercenary and poor, could not withstand the temptation; Ihe endeavoured, to the utmost of her skill, to seduce the mind of her niece, by a display of all the advantages such an attachment would secure to her; but Claudina had the best security for the preservation of her honor, which was her love for Ferdinand, and the hope that, though not an elder brother, he would have a handsome fortune, and that his affeEtion for her was an honourable one. - Those splendid overtures were therefore firmly rejeEed, though often renewed, and her lover felt himself under additional ties of love and obligation to a young woman, whose affection and good principles had stood the test of every temptation.,VOL. ., F Mean
Mean time his mind could not be easy; he had every reason to imagine his father never would approve of a connexion so mean and unsuitable to the future views he had for his establishment; he dared not men- tion his attachment, and hourly dreaded the discovery and its consequences. His brother often rallied him upon his passion, and at first persuaded him greatly against the indul- gence of a love so improper; but finding Ferdinand inflexibly determined to persevere, he had for some time ceased to speak on the subject. This young man grew daily more enamoured, and every moment more vexed and mortified at her humble situation, and the dangers to which (he was exposed by her residence with an unprincipled woman. He had her taught privately several branches of education, and was charmed with her docility and the progress she made in her fludies; every hour his love increased, and he determined to marry her privately.,One day walking in the garden, in a very lenfive mood, Rhodophil joined him, and,affetionately
affetionately inquired into the cause of his melancholy. - Ferdinand, whose love for Claudina had by no means leflened his as- feltions towards his brother, after a little hesitation, confessed the cause of his embar- raffment, his resolution to wed Claudina, and the dread he entertained of displeasing so good a father, whom he dearly loved and honoured.," If your resolution is taken," replied Rhodophil, " it would be a waite of time to enter into any arguments with you on the subject; the disadvantages attending it must be as obvious to yourself as to me. Your father never will give his content, and if you do marry her, you must keep the affair fe- cret; yourfather cannot livefor ever.",This last observation shocked Ferdinand extremely.-" Good God !" exclaimed he, " shall I enter into an union where my only chance of happiness must arise from the death of a parent so tender and refpeaable ? Perill the thought! No, let me be mifcrable from the disappointment of my wishes, but never,F 2 let
let me be criminal, detestable in my own eyes. Rhodophil observed, that he was more hurt than was necessary at the hint he had dropped, which meant nothing more than a natural conclusion : However," added he, "to prove the sincerity of my fraternal affection, marry Claudina; I will add to your allowance by a portion of mine ; you will then be enabled to maintain her, and by removing her to a different quarter of the town may elude all suspicion and obfer- vation.",How unequal was the prudence and refo- lution of eighteen to withstand the incite- ments of passion, or decline the indulgence of it when fanEtioned by a brother ! Ferdi- nand embraced his generous brother with transport, and, blind to all the ill effets that might be dreaded from an union so rath and unsuitable, he no longer hesitated, but the following day he informed Claudina and her aunt of his resolution, and for the first time aiked, " Who, and what were her parents ?" The aunt answered, " That her father, in,early
early life, had been in the army, an officer a but dying soon after her birth, her mother had only a small pension to live on, which poorly supported her for about three years, when she also died, leaving Claudina to her care; that the (Dupree) having only a hun- dred crowns a year to live on, had remained in the country until this lass year, when she thought it best to remove near the city, in the hope that her niece's beauty would get her a good husband." With this account Ferdinand was satisfied, and not a little pleased to find his mistress owed her birth to an officer, though she was poor and friend- less. In a very few days he was united to his Claudina, and removed her to another quarter in the suburbs, where the lived de- cently, if not elegantly, and having an affeaionate heart, and a good underfitnding, she was grateful for the advantages Ser- dinand's love procured for her, without extending her wishes beyond them.,He had been married about fix months; his wife promised an increase to their family,,F 3 when
when one morning his father, who had ap- peared uncommonly grave at breakfast, ordered Ferdinand to attend him to the libra-y. He obeyed; the manner, morethan the words, struck him; and with an agitated heart he appeared before him.," Ferdinand," said the Count, in a tone of solemnity, " I ardently wish to fee you fettled in life, an opportunity now offers not to be rejected. Count Benhorff has offered to give you his daughter, the Lady Amelia, whose large fortune and personal qharma render the alliance most truly desirable, and entirely unobjecionable." He stopped, Ser- dinand was thunderifruck; this was an oc- currence that he had never once dreamt of. He hesitated, faltered, at length muttered out something about "the impropriety of being married before his brother."," That is not your business, Sir," resumed the Count; " your brother has other views; Count Benhorff and his daughter have done you the honour of a distinguished preference, and it only remains for you to receive my,orders,
orders, and I should suppose, to comply with them immediately with gratitude and tranf- port, suitable to an offer so splendid, and so much superior to my expectations of fettling you in life; as you well know you have only a share of my personal fortune to expect. With whatever share you have the goodness to appropriate for me, Sir, I hope I shall be con- tent and thankful, nor meanly wish to ag- grandize myself by marriage without I could love and honour the Lady. Pardon me, Sir," added he, gathering a little more cou- rage, " pardon me, therefore, if I do not so readily accord to your wilhes as you may expeóq, but never will I marry a woman I cannot love.",And what, Sir," said the Count, kind- ling into a rage, " should prevent you from loving the Lady Amelia, who has a hundred adorers, though she has condescended to single you out, undeferving as I fear you are of the ditinEtion. Tell me, Sir, what are the obitacles to your being attached to so charming a young woman ? Never did Ser-,F 4 dinand
dinand experience. equal perplexity to that moment; he trembled, and his emotions scarcely permitted him to speak.,' I have no knowledge of her temper; her - .,c Say no more," cried the Count, inter- rupting him; "no more equivocation, I fee I have not been misinformed, you have formed another attachment; fay, tell me, is it not so ?"," I am above uttering a falsehood," an. fwered Ferdinand; "C I own it, Sir, there is a young woman -.","Foolish, imprudent boy!" exclaimed the Count, in a violent rage; " your youth hath been reduced into 'an intrigue with an artful wanton.",By Heavens! No," cried Ferdinand, " I have not been seduced, nor is the a wanton."," Hold, insolent !" returned the Count, c and bear me; if you have formed an im- prudent connexion, break it off, I will enable you to give a handsome fum, and have done,with
with it. Prepare to carry your addresses to. the Lady Amelia; these are my absolute commands, which I expect you to obey, or you are no longer a son of mine."," Oh ! my father," cried Ferdinand, - " reverse that cruel lentence, command not impossibilities."," I do not," answered the Count, a little softened; " an affair of gallantry has nothing to do with an engagement of honour, an union for life. You are young, and have been drawn away by your passions; but de- cency forbids you to continue your attach- ment whilst you are soliciting the Lady Amelia's hand :. I therefore request you, Ser- dinand, I will not command, I deire you to dissolve your present connexion, and let me have the happiness of teeing you established in my life-time. You are the only pledge left me of a too tender affe&ion: Your angel mother died in giving you life; let not that life so dearly purchased render my latter days unhappy j let me meet her in the realms,F 5 above
above with the conscious delight of having completed the happiness of her child.",The Count's voice faltered as he pro- tounced the last words. Ferdinand was in agonies; he threw himself at his father's feet:--" Spare me, spare your wretched son; oh! Sir, happiness and Lady Amelia cannot be joined with me; happiness consists not in titles, grandeur, or riches: I am moderate in my wishes; my brother will aggrandize your house."," And you," said the Count, interrupting him with fury, "you resolve to disgrace it. Just Heaven! how am I punished for my errors in the person of my darling son ! es,. y'ou are my punisher; you have chosen to be the infirument of vengeance, to retaliate upon your father, and haften the few short days that are allotted to me, full of sorrow and despair: But hear me,, once more I command you to promise me that you will give up your present infatuation, that you will quit the society of that woman who has fe-,duced
duced you from your duty. Speak, fay you will obey me."," 1 dare not deceive my father," replied Ferdinand, with grief and horror in his coun- tenance; " I dare not forfeit my integrity.",(, You persist then in your folly, in your crimes," exclaimed the other, in a rage little short of madness; " then mark my words: The allowance I have given you, I ihall re- fume as long as you resist my will; the crea- ture who has bewitched you I will punish, and if you dare to form any legal sacred connexion with her,- my everlasting curses attend you both !"," Stop, oh! stop," cried the frantic Ser- dinand, "jhe is my wife !" The Count drop- ped into a chair.," Wretch! unnatural wretch! what haft thou done ?" said he, in a tone of horror, "thou art now an alien to my blood. I re- call not what I have denounced; my curses are registered above go, leave me, fee me no more; dare not to enter any mansion where I reside, for I solemnly protest this is,F6 the
the last time I will behold thee !"-He rose from his chair, withdrew to a closet, and rang the bell. Orders were given to carry every thing belonging to Ferdinand out of the Castle that instant, and never to admit him more within its gates.,CHAP. VIL. M EAN time the unhappy youth had,fainted 'on the floor, where he was found by his brother, who recovered and tried to sooth him into composure; but the dreadful curse fill vibrated in his ears, diftrac- don was in his looks, and his tongue refused utterance to the emotions of his heart. He,was
was conveyed to Rhodophil's apartment, who assured him he would leave nothing undone to soften his father's displeasure. - Comfort yourself, my brother," said he, " all violences must subside, time must be allowed, fear nor, I will be your friend and advocatej and for means of fuibfitence you, may rely on me."-Ferdinand could make no reply; he prffled his brother's hand, and, attended by the faithful Ernest, left the Cartle, and returned to his wife. The moment she saw him ihe screamed. Never was a. man so altered in so short a time. Ernest was obliged to explain to her the discovery which had been made, and fie no longer wondered at the grief and despair visible in her husband; she blamed and execrated herself as the cause, and in the height of her agitations absolutely proposed to him to give her up, to renounce her society, and permit her to spend her days in sorrow and obscurity. But Ferdinand would not be outdone in affeotion and gene- rofity.--( You are my wife," said he; " you have not offended, and it is both my incli-,nation
nation-and my duty to protect you, my dearef consolation, under every afflition." Ernest endeavoured to calm the grief and agitations of both; he promised to assist the entreaties of Rhodophil, by every representation that could soften the Count towards Ferdinand, and induce him to think favourably of Claudina.,But in vain was every effort to mitigate the Count's resentment, until one day, long after Claudina had been brought to bed of a boy, (whom Ferdinand named Charles Rhodophil, after his father and brother) when she was walking with her child in her arms, in the Ikirts of the forest for air, the Count, and Rhodophil, who had been on a hunting party, met her; the latter dropped back. to speak to her; the Count eyed her attentively, and when his son came up,. inquired who she was; with some hesitation he acknowledged fie was the wife of Ferdinand. He flarted, and was fGlent for several minutes; at length, sighing deeply, "I own," said he, "( he is extremely beautiful-; he.has a child too !-,11.
Ill-fated Ferdinand ! thou haft undone thy- self, and rendered me culpabile and wretched;: but the infant is at least inn,,e)r; I did nor curse, not reprobate that therefore I will allow something to keep it from want." -- On his return Ernest was called, and directed to pay them quarterly twenty crowns. The- old man was overjoyed, and tried to obtain a larger allowance, but his master. was immo- vable: " To keep them from want is fuffi- cient, it is the charity I would beffow on a firanger, they have no claims upon me.",Glad even to have gained this point, Ernest hastened to them with the intelligence, with a quarter's advance, and bid them look on it as a lucky omen of future reconciliation. Ferdinandwas transported; he wrote to his father a letter full of acknowledgments, deep. contrition for having offended him, and every possible submission his situation would allow of; but his letter was returned unopened, and Ernest forbidden to mention his name. - Rhodophil frequently visited them, and often made Claudina little presents, which were,very
very acceptable, for they experienced a loss which made their little- income very confined. One morning, i.. coming down stairs, there seemed a. disorder in the room very unusual . no fire was made, no preparation for break- fast, and the door of the house left on the. latch. Their aunt, who had always performed all the offices of a servant, assisted by Clau- dina whilst Ferdinand nursed his little boy. This aunt it was plain Was gone outt, but for what, or where to,, they could form. no con-- jeturei however, they exerted themselves. to do the necessary offices, but when they canme to prepare their breakfast, they could. snd no spoons, and in a short time after dif- covered the drawers in the room had been. opened, and all Claudina's linen was .taken away; they likewise miffed Ferdinand's. watch, which hung in the roomn.,Strangely alarmed, they made every pof- fible search, which only served to discover more losses, and to convince them they had been robbed, and by this aunt. Their con- fternation cannot be expressed; but the cruel,truth
truth was unquestionable, and with the very little money they had, they were obliged to purchase necessaries for use, which was a heavy drawback. What could have induced this woman to injure and desert them they could not imagine; but the fa6t was certain, and the loss and inconvenience great. Clau- dina was again with child, and this event added to the continued displeasure of the Count, which affeaed her husband with a deep melancholy, threw her into a low ner- vous disorder, which rendered her but little capable of domestic business, and but for. the kindness of Rhodophil and Ernest, they must have perished. Mean time it was very visible that a heavy dejection overwhelmed the Count, his constitution grew weak, his spirits funk, his appetite loft.-Every one was alarmed; the physician gave it as his opinion that it was a constitution breaking up, but no immediate danger; at length he confined himself solely to his apartment, and saw only Rhodophil, the physician, and his valet.,Ferdinand.
Ferdinand was informed of his father'. situation, and was nearly diffrated;. He en- treated Rhodophil to intercede for hiin,,that he might once more throw himself at the feet of his justly offended parent, and receive a last blessing." His entreaties were rejeaed-his presence forbidden. He then wrote a few lines, imploring his beloved father to revoke the heavy curse- he had laid upon him and. his wife.-His brother re. turned the etter, his father had refused it; and commanded him to mention his name no more.. The truly wretched Ferdinand used to walk before the Castle gates for days- together, imploring admittance, but all was fruitless; no servant dared to disobey orders, so positively given to the contrary.,One morning, whilst leaning his arms on the outside gate, Ernest came to him: "I sill run the rifque,. follow me to my cham- ber, Sir,. no time is to be loft." More dead than alive, he attended Ernest without.fpeak- ing, when, at the very entrance of the house, they met his brother.. He started back with,amazement:
amazement: " Good God } Ferdinand t how came you here ?"," Pardon me, Sir," faitd Ernest, much confused; " but from what I hear, my noble master is at the point of death; now, and now only, when he must solicit mercy from his heavenly father, is the time to try if he will extend that mercy, on his part, which he must supplicate from the Almighty."," You are right," replied Rhodophil - " Come with me to the anti-chamber, my dear brother, and I will procure you admit- tance, though all others are forbidden." - Ernest bowed and withdrew; with a beating heart and trembling limbs Ferdinand entered the anti-chamber, where Rhodophil's valet fat, who also flarted at feeing the unexpected guest his master brought in.," Wait without," said Rhodophil, "nor at your peril permit any one to enter." The servant quitted the room.," Now," said the former, "I will go in and fee the state our father is in, and admi- nifter a cordial to support his spirits.'" -,Scarcely
Scarcely daring to breathe, Ferdinand waited near a quarter of an hour in all the agonies of suspense aid, terror.,Rhodophit at length appearedi :--" He sleeps," said he, "every thing depends on reft, we must not disturb him, wait a little." Ferdinand bowed his head, he could nottruft to his voice, his heart beat with increasing violence. Near half. an hour elapsed, when his attention was suddenly routed by two or three deep groans. He Rfarted, and flew to, the door; a short gallery communicated to the bed chamber of the Count, there he listened, a kind of bustle seemed to be in the room, but the groans were not repeated; his hand was on the lock, hardly sensible whether he intended to open it or not, wlen it was fud- denly opened on the other fide. The Count's valet appeared: "Be so good to return!" said he, " all is over, my master is no more !",Ferdinand tottered back into the other room, and fell lifeless on the floor, where his brother found him on his return to the li, brary, at which period this history began.,The-
The subsequent circumstances have been fully related, and having sent Ferdinand to Vienna, we shall attend to Claudina and her children,who were for several daysinconfolable for the departure of her husband.,C HA P. VIII. E VERY attention that affeaion, and the,duties of hospitality enjoined, was paid by Rhodophil to his fifter-in-law, and no longer restrained by the prudence and pride of Ferdinand, he made her a number ofcon- fiderable presents, increased the finery of her wardrobe, was assiduous to amuse her, and in short gained so highly on the esteem and gratitude of Claudina, that she insensibly felt,her
her regret lessened for the loss of her huiband, and although [he fometiiles felt and expressed a concern for his safety, yet the well-timed amusements Rhodophil prepared for her, left that occasional -anxiety but as a passing cloud upon her memory, that was followed by brighter ideas. Ernest, who had engaged to pay every attention to his mistress, as he called her, found nothing was wanting from him to comfort her, and so captious is the human mind, that, though he would have been grieved to have seen her unhappy, yet he was very much displeased to fee her so cbee;ful.,She commanded the house entirely, every servant was at her disposal, and the master of it seemed to have no will but her's, no laws but of her making. If we look back, and fee the very humble state in which Claudina had lived before she knew Ferdinand, and even the humble mediocrity whichfhe enjoyed with him before the death of Count Renaud; if we confider that,. though Ferdinand had procured matiers to teach her accomplish-,6 ments
ments before she married, and of course with the advantages of his conversation her mind must have been enlightened, and her under- standing improved, yet frill a number of im- proper ideas, habitual from early life, would at times recur, and render both her sentiments and behaviour very unequal. She had been always taught to expe&t that her beauty would make her fortune, therefore of course she thought highly of her charms, and when {me fomerimes listened to the extravagant praises of Rhodophil, Ihe was ready to blame her- self for so quickly accepting the offer of a younger, portionless brother, when, in all probability, had she waited, she might have been a Countess.,A too frequent repetition of those thoughts by degrees undermined the warmth of her affeEtion for her hulband, and one day, when walking in the garden with Rhodophil, that he was lavish in his encomiums on her per- son, she interrupted by asking, with a look of naivete, " How it happened, that, if he thought so well of her, he had not loved her like Ferdinand ?","And
And did I not love you? - Yes, Claudine," replied he, " from the first moment I adored you; but could I fee my brother wretched ? - Or could I hope you would reserve the blessing of your hand for me until my father's death ? Neither dared I think of marrying you to involve you in wretchedness. Had you suffered for me, what I have known you to bear with Ferdi- nand, I should have been diftraEted. No, Claudina, such was the delicacy of my pas- sion, that I chose to be miserable myself, rather than make the woman I adored un- happy; to lay her under the interdiction of a father, the weight of a curse would have funk me to the grave.",Not a word of this was loft on Claudina; every syllable funk into her foul; he began to reflet on what she had forfeited by mar- rying Ferdinand, and blamed the ardour of that love which had fought its own gratifi- cation at her expence. Rhodophil saw the workings of her mind, and pursued his infi- dious tale.,"When
c When my brother married you, how great was my mifery-what sleepless nights, what days of angiifh ! yet how did I labour for your happiness ? Now I may tell you:- Know then, my father never allowed you one ihilling; I invented that tale to spare your delicacy, that you might not feel yourself too much obliged to me; but could I do too much for the woman I adored ? During my father's illness I laboured with uncommon zeal to procure a settlement for you, to pro- cure a pardon for my brother. I ventured to brave his utmost resentment by taking him into the next room (not thinking his death so very near) in the hope of having him revoke that dreadful curse he had laid upon him; but, alas! he died, and all my endeavours were fruitless."," How !" exclaimed fle, "( Did he not fee his father ? Did he not forgive him on his death-bed ?"," No," he replied, " he never saw the Count after the day your marriage was dif- covered.",VOL. I. G "Good
" Good Heavens !" said she, "what im- position, what falfities did Ferdinand tell me !" She then repeated to him what has been already mentioned, and the very cir- cumftances which he had invented to calm her mind, and restore her peace, were now turned against him, as a piece of base dtupli- city, and the inference drawn was, " that if he was capable of so much deceit in one thing, he mlight in another, and therefore mhe could have no confidence where there was room for doubts."-Rhodophil, who was perfectly acquainted with his brother's motives for the deception, pretended to be entirely ignorant of them, and, by the most artful finesse, gave a colouring to an action ditated by tenderness alone, that stamped an indelible impression on the mind of Claudina, to the injury of that love and truth she owed to the most affectionate of husbands.,Letters very loon arrived from the much injured Ferdinand, acquainting them of his arrival at Vienna, his introduction to the Emperor, and the desirable situation in which,he
he found himself placed. His expressions to Claudina were replete with tenderness, and all his anxiety arose from a reparation that he knew must be equally painful to her. The only confolarion he could promise to himself were her letters, and he besought her to in- dulge him with hearing of herself and chil- dren by every opportunity. To his brother he was grateful and affectionate; to Ernest kind and friendly, requesting him to watch over the health and peace of his beloved wife, whose tender sensibility he was appre- henfive would injure her conflitution.,Poor Ferdinand! little did he conceive that his little bark of happiness was wrecked upon a fatal shore that blasted all his hopes for ever; much less could he have an idea to what hand he was indebted for conducing her to the port ofdeftrution. Ernefi, when he had perused his letter, sighed heavily :- " Alas !" said he, " how one fatal aftion has destroyed the peace of a whole family for ever! The mole that has long iaboureJ to undermine the happinets of Ferdinand has,G i now
now succeeded; his own rash hand first pointed the weapon that muff wound his bosom beyond all possibility of a cure, for I too plainly fee his wife is grown indifferent to him, and attached to the pleasures of the world !",Days and weeks pased away, and law Claudina gay and happy; they heard often from Ferdinand, who had been twice in an engagement, and had been promoted. - When the campaign was over he hoped to return and embrace all the treasures he possessed in one circle, a tender wife, a gene- rous and affecionate brother, and his darling children.-This hope, so flattering to him, was little capable of giving pleasure to the inhabitants of the Castle; and Ernest ob- served all at once a deep thoughtfulness take poffeflion of the Count, and a pensive me- lancholy steal over the features of Claudina, for neither of which was there apparently any cause.,One
One day, being in the room which had formerly been the library, and adjoining to Claudina's bed chamber, fitting at the win- dow indulging his own refleEtions, he thought he heard the Count's voice in a whispering tone ; there was nothing extraordinary or reprehensible in his being in her apartment, yet some how Ernest found his curiosity ex- cited to know why the conversation should be in a whisper; he therefore listened, and though he could only make out indirec fen- tences and half words, he underflood but too much, and retired overwhelmed with astonish- ment and horror; a scheme replete with the most unpardonable wickedness seemed to be in agitation, which it was his duty, ifpoflible, to prevent.,The following day Ernest fought out the Count's valet, who had been always more civil to him than ever his mailer had, since the old Count's death, and which indeed arose from a circumstance Ernest had long since forgotten. In the juvenile days of Rhodophil and Ferdinand, when they were riding out,G 3 one
one day, accompanied by Peter (then also a lad) and Ernest, the horse of Peter took fright: Ernest, who had an excellent one, as quickly followed, overtook the ether, and by a dexterous manoeuvre stopped the horse in the very moment when he must have plunged over a precipice. This signal ser- vice Peter never had forgotten, and though he could boast but of little principle or in- tegrity in any one point, yet he always looked up to Ernest as the preserver of his life when the old man scarcely remembered a Engle circumstance of it, and had Sometimes been at a loss to account for Peter's particular civilities to him. These attentions, however, encouraged Ernest to address him, and to endeavour, if possible, to gain his confidence, being well assured that his master's secrets were in his possession.,Meeting by chance in the gallery, the old steward invited him to his apartment in the evening, an honour Peter was proud of, and took care not to neglect : He found a good bottle of wine prepared for him, and a very,friendly
friendly reception; both warmed his heart. After a little preparatory converfition the old Gentleman remarked, " that he was fear- ful the Count, or his fifter-in-law, was ill, as they appeared to be very dull and melan- choly."," As to illness, Mr. Ernest," answered Peter, " there is not much of that I believe; but they have enough to make them melan- choly, when it is likely Mr. Ferdinand may soon come home."," How !" cried the other, " that is strange indeed ! I should rather think they would be overjoyed at that, though to be sure he won't flay long,","Ah! bless you, Mr. Ernest, you know nothing of the business, and yet it is as plain as the nose in your face."," Why, you know, Peter, I never pry into secrets, and am no tatler of other peo- ple's affairs."," No, I'll be sworn, you ar'n't; you are a good man, Sir, and don't know what wick-,G 4 ednefs
ednefs goes forward here."-" Why don't you drink, Peter ?","C I do, I do, thank your love." Two or three glasses opened his heart still more freely. " To tell you the truth, Mr. Ernest, my mailer, the Count, is but a bad man, for feeing he has got all the fortune, he might have let his brother keep his wife to himself.",How! why, sure! why, you do not think he wants to separate them, do you ?"," Bless your foul, why they be leagued together, and to my mind Madame Claudina loves him more than ever she did her hus- band."," Astonishing!" cried Ernest. " Yes, 'tis astonishing to be sure, because Mr. Ferdinand is a much handsomer man; but I'll let you know the whole if you'll be secret.",You know I am no talker, Peter." " Nor more you ar'n't, for you never made mischief on any poor servant, so I'll tell you, then, as sure as you be alive, Madame is a breeding."," Impossible !"
' Impossible !" exclaimed the other. " No, no, 'tis not unpoffible, the truth is out, and master wants to persuade her to go away to some place in Hungary, as if she runed away, and then they think Mr. Ferdi- nand will kill himself, or break his heart, or something, and then they two are to be married. This was one scheme; then an- other was, to have Mr. Ferdinand way-laid and killed, for if he comes home all. will come out, and then 'twill for a certainty be murder among them."," Good Heavens! what treachery and infamy ! How did you learn all this, Peter?"," Why, because I am in master's secrets; he can't do without me.",(' Then I conjure you, Peter, to let me know all your proceedings; I will amply reward you, and God will bless you if you serve the innocent.",." Why, as to that, Sir, I know I am not very innocent to be sure; but I love you, for you saved my life you know, when the horse was going to caper over the mountain,G 5 with
with me, and so I think it my duty to serve you, and if you desire me I will tell you all, only don't speak a word of it to master or any body." This Ernest faithfully promised, and Peter engaged to ftep into his room, whenever he could gain any intelligence to communicate.,This information of Peter's corroborating the conversation he had overheard in the library, left Ernest no room for doubt of a connexion terrible to think of, yet what steps to take, whether to acquaint Ferdinand with the dreadful secret, or to let him till remain ignorant and happy, where measures he thought must depend on the result of their determinations, and for the knowledge ofther he depended on Peter. Nothing particular transpired for two days. Claudina's dejection increased, and file seemed very ill, her appe- tite was loft, and frequent faintings alarmed the family; but (he refused to have medical advice, and said it was only weakness from a violent cold. On the third night, however, fle was seized with convulsions, only her,maid
maid and Rhodophil attended her, and for hours her life was in great danger; but to- wards the morning fle grew better. Rho- dophil seemed transported that the convul- sions had left her, and observed among the servants that his fifter-in-law had for many years been fubjedc to those fits at times, and the approach of the disorder had occasioned the weakness and dejection of her spirits for some days before, he was glad the criis was over.",This tale passed current with the servants; but Ernest had his suspicions, which a short time confirmed, for she soon recovered; and was as gay and as happy as usual. The arri- val of Ferdinand, in about three weeks after, seemed to give general joy in the family. - Ernest alone was unhappy, because he knew too much, yet he resolved to be silent, rather than destroy the peace of his beloved matter, (as he always called. him) and render his future days miserable.,G6 CHAP.
CHAP. IX. FERDINAND had a month's leave of,absence; he had been promoted to a higher rank than he could have hoped for, his profpets in the army were such as to inspire a hope of being in a short time able to provide for his family. He returned to them enlivened by expetation, and tranf- ported to embrace a darling wife,and a gene- rous brother. In the evening, when retired to the apartment of his Claudina, when ex- pressing his raptures at feeing her so well and happy. A deep and hollow groan made,him
him start from his chair, and threw his wife into a trembling fit.-" What, or where does that groan come from ?" cried she. He was about to answer, when a second, still more alarming, was followed by those words from the fame voice Ferdinand had twice before heard :-Fly, fly from her arms, asyou would avoid fin and death!" - Claudina shrieked and fainted. Her huiband rang the bell for affifance. She relapsed from one fit into another for leveral hours; all was fright and confusion, tor he did not chufe to account for her disorder among the servants: One, however, observed these were worse fits than she had lately, because they lasted longer.,c, What then," aiked Ferdinand, " has she before now had such seizures as this ?"," Yes, Sir," answered the servant, "a lhort time ago, and my master told us, as to be lure you know, that Madame was often troubled with them.",This information surprised him, the con- clufion in his own mind was, that she had,before
before now been alarmed in a similar manner; but the words dwelt upon his memory: - What could be their import-" As you would avoid fin and death!" Good God! how shocking! He had not time, however for much -.eflcition, the state his wife lay in chiefiy engroficd his attention; he insisted upon medical advice, and a phyfikian was sent for. Before he could make his appear- ance difrat&ion had seized her .brain; she talked wild and incoherent, of death, murder, Rhodophil and Ferdinand ! When the DoCtor: came he declared her in a frenzy fever, and methods were taken to lower it so effceually, that in a few hours she lay quite in a torpid state, insensible to every thing round her. Poor Ferdinand withdrew for a few moments at the requefi of Rhodophil.," Alas!" cried he, " is this my welcome! Have I returned home with the dear delight of being happy in the bosom of my family, and muff this dreadful prohibition cause me £onfummate wretchedness !",What;
c What prohibition?" asked Rhodophil, eagerly. Ferdinand was sensible that he had said too much, that he had excited a curio- fity he knew not how to elude. After a little pauti and consideration, he acquainted Rhodophil with the preceding circumstance, adding, " that the voice seemed to be his father's." The other funk back in his chair, pale and trembling, unable to utter a syllable, his eyes fixed on his brother with a wild in- quiring look. -" I fee," said Ferdinand, "( you are extremely shocked; had not Clau- dina been prelent with me, I should hardly have ventured to relate to you so strange and improbable a circumstance, fearful left you should have ridiculed my visionary ideas; but I am too well assured of the reality."," Of what ?" cried the Count, falteringly: "What did you hear else ?"," No more than the words I have re- peated, words sufficient to harrow up my loul, to fill me with dreadful apprehensions, and terrifying images. What they mean, Heaven only knows, for I am not conscious,of
of any crimes, and after having so long lived with my wife, why this alarming caution now ? Why, I am forbidden to return to her arms by supernatural powers, is beyond my comprehension to define; I fee only that there is, there must be, some dreadful cause, and that I am marked out for misery. 0, Rhodophil! wretched are the days of those who fail in their first duties, obedience to a parent; and sure deftruEtion follows a fa- ther's curse." No longer able to repress his emotions Ferdinand wept aloud.,Rhodophil, who was by this time a little recovered (though his eye was flill wandering kith an affrighted glance, and his limbs no longer boasted their usual steadiness) fought to speak comfort to his brother "I will not (said he) tell you that- it is possible your senses might be deceived; I am neither cre- dulous, nor superstitious, yet I think you would do right to pay some observance to a warning from the dead, and all that we can infer is, that the union between you and your wife is displeasing to Heaven." - "Where-,fore," 2
fore," cried Ferdinand, " the want of birth and riches is no crime in the fight of God; I married unknown to my father, that was a fin against his authority; but can it be a crime of that magnitude to draw down the displeasure of Heaven ?"," Oh! yes, if it provoked a father's malediction, it rendered both criminal, and I am the wretched victim; I am singled out from hundreds who have committed the fame error, the fame unpardonable a& of difobe- dience, to be held up as a pharos to warn unthinking youth of the miseries attending a too hasty connexion unfanftioned by a pa- rent's approbation. Oh! my father, I am indeed severely punilihed !",This apostrophe drove Rhodophil from the room ; he could not support the fight of his brother's distress. Ernest immediately entered; the afflicted heart clings for confo- lation to the first sympathizing friend; the old man was shocked to fee him; he relted his head on the shoulder of Ernefr, whilst he repeated what had happened in Claudina's,apartment.
apartment. " Dear unhappy creature " - added he, " I have destroyed her peace, my fatal love has undone her; in humble obfcu- rity she might have been happy, and I have dragged her into wretchedness.","My dear master (said Ernest) do not reproach yourself on her account; your wife cannot, ought not to blame you, whatever the circumstances may be that renders your union improper; to her you have always done your duty. If she is unhappy, you are not to blame; the offence against your father was designed to promote her happiness as well as your own, why it has failed, we are not to inquire; but remember this, that the fame voice which bid you 'fly' from your wife, pronounced the words ' Pardon andpeace ;' if there is credibility in one, there is in the other.",Ferdinand raised his head, and looking ear- neftlyinhisface, " There is an implication in your words that shock me, that would fill me with the most torturing apprehensions, but that I know the impossibility of there being,any
any grounds for them. The 'pardon and peace' has never been one day absent from my memory, strange if it lhould, when it is the ground-work, the only hold I have to reconcile me to myself: But, alas! if I lay hold on that for consolation, if I look on those words as a sacred command, what muff I now sacrifice to the fame mandate ? My wife, my dear innocent wife, the mother of my children, the sweet comforter under all my misfortunes, muff I give up her society, fly her arms ? Oh! itern and cruel !"," Stop, Sir (said Ernest, interrupting him) " reflec, who you are accusing, remember that, to us ihort.fighted mortals, the events which often appear most distressing, are in- tended for our greatest blerfings.",Ernest," replied Ferdinand, " you are a natural philosopher, you know not the diffi- cultyof beinga pratical one, and at your age the passions have loft their turbulence. 0, that I also was old, or laid peaceably in my grave! But I forget Claudina (added he, rising briskly, and rushing to her apartment.),She
She had just began to shew some signs of re- collection, but the moment he appeared {he shrieked and turned from him. His little boy Charles was in the room; he ran to his father: (' My mamma will not speak to me, will not kifs me; indeed, papa, I have not been naughty."-The artless voice of inno- cence overcame Ferdinand; he struggled to repress his emotions, but the big drops rol- led down his face. He embraced his child, then turning to her, "Claudina! my dear Claudina, will you not speak to us ?" She turned her head, her eyes met his, she groaned, and averted them to the child. " My poor boy !" exclairred Ihe. He ran to her .arms. She embraced him: " Go, go, my child, to your father." Ferdinand was deeply affeEted. He ordered the attendants to withdraw, then feating himself by her: " My best, my only love (said he) take comfort, you have been terrified, recover yourself, my Claudina." He would have taken her hand; ihe withdrew it. t' Revere the voice of Heaven," cried the, greatly agitated, " obey its decrees, pollution is,in
in my touch, and unless you wilh me mad indeed approach me not. Poor unhappy man ! well may you curse the hour you first saw me."," Who, I!" cried he, "c Icure; alas ! too well I know the horrors of that rash impetu- ofity of the mind. No, but for your fake I have no regrets; I have drawn down the wrath of Heaven and you, innocent as you are, muff susser the fad effets."," Innocent !" repeated she, " leave me, Ferdinand, I beseech you to leave me; once more, if you would preserve us both from everlasting perdition, reverence that ficied command, fly me as you would do a fcor- pion that might fling you to death." Inex- preffibly shocked, and apprehensive that her senses were again wandering, he rang the bell, and on the entrance of the ftivants withdrew: Regardless of what contruftions might be put on the orders the gave, she insisted that neither her husband or Rhodophil should be again admitted to her apartment.,The
The house was melancholy, for every one in it was gloomy and unhappy; they thun- ned each other; the two brothers met at meals, but those meals were short and un- sociable; each feared to inquire into parti- culars they had reason to dread j yet they heard Claudina was better. The third day, when torturing suspense, and disappointed love, had worn Ferdinand almost to a thadow, Ernest entered the room: " I am come, Sir, from Madame Claudina,"," What (cried the other) have you been admitted ?",( I was sent for, Sir, and have had a long conversation.","' O, tell me, quickly tell, the result, my mind is in tumults.",(' I know it, Sir, and therefore am I come. Pray, Heaven, that what I have to relate may compose it. I received an order to attend on your Lady; I obeyed, and my old heart ached to fee the ravages grief had made. She ordered every one from the room; she was fitting on the fide of the bed:,Ernest,
Ernest (said she, with much solemnity) you are the faithful servant and friend of the family; on your fidelity I rely, and your assistance I solicit.",Assistance! (repeated Ferdinand) of what nature, pray ?","( Have the goodness to hear me, Sir, without interruption," resumed Ernest: "I assured the Lady she might depend upon my readiness to serve her in every thing consistent with my duty." This was her answer.," Some circumstances have arisen that ren- der it absolutely necessary I should quit this house, and be separated from my husband; I with to go away equally unknown to him or his brother: I am not destitute of roney, and for this purpose shall use it without fcru- pie. I intend to retire into a convent, will you assist me privately ? I affiured her I would, and immediately took an oath never to reveal the place of her abode without her content."," How! (cried Ferdinand) is this your affection for me ? And do you think I will,permit
permit her to quit this house, leave me and her children, my generous brother, bury herself in a convent, «fle to be the sacrifice for my errors ? Do Y u think I will ever susser this ?","I do, Sir (answered he, calmly) I think you refpet the will of Heaven, that you will confider, you must separate to be happy,- I shall this day set about an inquiry for a proper residence for her, and when I have found it, neither force nor persuasions shall oblige me to reveal the secret without her permifflon. What I fay to you is in confi- dence which she allows of; but it is her earnest request you do not mention it to your brother.",Ernest withdrew, leaving Ferdinand over- whelmed with grief, astonishment, and irre- solution. He resolved, however, to watch her apartment and Ernest also, that they might not elude his observation, and that he might at least have the fatisfation of knowing her place of residence.,The
The next day the old man was absent, and Ferdinand rightly conjectured he was about making preparations for her departure. He kept his eye on her apartment, his heart was in great agitations, he found the ' awful voice' had effectually terrified Claudina, and thather resolution was taken; he could not but applaud her fortitude, though he was overwhelmed with anguish. Sometimes it occurred to him as very extraordinary, that having resided several months together after his father's death in that house, in that fame apartment, without the. least difturl-ance; why now, after so much time had elapsed, a supernatural being flould command him to flyfro;m '7,e arms, as he would avoidJf;. and deatk. the more he reRleted, the more he was puzzled, the whole was so very wonder- ful, so much exceeding credibility, that he was sometimes tempted to think it was all illusion; but then the proofs returned, Clau- dina heard the last fatal command as well as himself, there could be no doubt of it: If then he admitted the one, he could not be,VOL. I. H mistaken
mistaken in the other: Had his brother then a 'corrupt heart?' His brother, who had ever been his friend, the proteEtor of his wife and children, whose condut had ever appeared so fair, so open ? Then he recol- lected his information from Ernest, and other circumstances, as a counterbalance to those acts of generosity. Puzzled, loft in con- jeEture, and miserably unhappy, Ferdinand passed that day and night, having inquired, previous to his retiring, how his wife did, and heard that she was much better, but desired to be undisturbed; they will then proceed on their plan, thought he, in a day or two, and it behoves me to be attentive to their motions.,The morning came, weak and unrefrefhed, he threw on his clothes, and proceeded to the gallery, which communicated with Clau- dina's apartment, there he met Ernest: - " Return, Sir (said he) if you please, to your apartment, I wish to speak to you." - Ferdinand complied; they entered, and ihut the door. "1 Now, my dear master, collect,your
your fortitude, be governed by reason; Claudina is gone.",'" Gone!" exclaimed the other, " how- where-when ?"," She went from hence last night, and is already in a place of safety."," Then she cannot be far off," cried Ferdinand.," Pardon me, Sir, when I said Ihe was in a place of safety; it did not imply that she was at the end of her journey; but, however, here, Sir, is a letter, which lhe ordered me to deliver to you."-He hastily tore it open, and read the following lines:," Adieu, my amiable and too tender hus- band:-Hufband! O Heavens! my tears blot out the name; adieu then befl, and most injured of men-warned by a miraculous event, Iflyfromyou, from guilt and misery. Forget me and be happy: I am dead to you and the world ; on the verge of the grave, the profpet was dreadful: I devote the reft of my days to penitence and prayer. My infant I take with me; she may one day,H emerge
emerge into the world if the lives; should she die, her happiness is secured.," You shall from time to time hear of me, but you will never fee me more. I have darkened all your profpeets of felicity; I have returned the tendercft attachment with ingratitude. I am now no more. You have my full and entire consent to marry again under more fortunate auspices, for I again repeat that I am dead to you, solemnly de- voted to a solitary life. May you live and be happy. Let not my dear boy detest the memory of his mother, he is .young, and may believe I am dead; I wish not to be remembered. Return to the army, let glory be your mistress; she will amuse your mind, and lead you in the road to happiness, by teaching you to forget Claudina. Heavens bless you, and my dear, dear boy, for ever. I have written to the Count; the letter is of little consequence. May my name never more pass your lips. Haften from hence; confide in the faithful Ernest; forgive and forget the unworthy Claudina.",Ferdinand
Ferdinand perused this letter with all J.; marks of the wildest astonishment. " What fatal mystery lurks beneath the expressions in this paper !" cried he, " Of what crimes has the been guilty, but her attachment to me, and wherefore does she accuse herself of ingratitude ? Marry again! Oh ! Clau- dina, you little know my heart. There is, there muit be some secret with which I am unacquainted, every line in her letter disco- vers it, why else call me injured? Oh! Ernest, declare this secret, whatever it is, the knowledge cannot make me so miserable as this dreadful uncertainty, this painful ima- gination."," From me, Sir," anfweredErneft, "you can learn nothing, for I have nothing to reveal; reconcile your mind to this event, which mufl be for the advantage of both. - Nothing on earth shall make me betray my trust, nor, whilst 1 live, discover. the place of her abode. Should I die, when you are from me, I will take care you thall then, through a particular channel, still hear from,,H 3 or
or of her, if you desire it; but I hope time will have its usual effects to restore your tranquillity, and forget the object that now causes your distress.",(, Impossible !" exclaimed Ferdinand, - "impofEble that I should ever forget my wife, the mother of my children, the choice of my heart! 0, why, wherefore am I marked out to be the veriest wretch that crawls the earth, cut off from every endearing tie, and from some fatal unknown cause interdicted from enjoying the only blessing my misfor- tunes had left me !"," My dear mailer," answered the old man, tears in his eyes, " recolle& you have still one tie, one blessing, your son; to the dispensations of Providence it is our duty to submit, it avails nothing to inquire into the causes of things beyond our comprehension.,"Had she died, I trust, I should have borne my sorrows like a man ;but this strange, incomprehenfiblemyftery'- . My child too! a blessing! 0, Ernest, may he not live to wring a father's heart with grief, to retaliate,upon
upon me ! He may, and I deserve it should be so, but, he may make me wretched, he may Ihorten my days by disobedience and affic- tion; but never, never shall he experience a father's curse, nor firuggle under a maledic- tion registered in Heaven, and never to be expunged ! Do not indulge that idea, Sir, Heaven hears not, confirms not, man's rash imprecations, uttered in a moment of frenzy; their confirmation must depend upon circum- stances; Heaven heeds not the curses of disappointed ambition."," I have no longer any business here," cried Ferdinand, flarting from a reverie, and hardly attending to the words of Ernef; - " nor will I return to the army, I care not what becomes of me, but I will fee my bro- ther."-He flew out of the room to Rho- dophil's apartment, which entering without ceremony, he found'him gazing on a letter that he held in his hand, fixed like a statue. The entrance of Ferdinand startled him; he rose, crushed the paper into his pocket, - "Well, Sir !" was all he could fay.-(" 0,,H 4 my
my brother! 0, Rhodophil! Claudina's gone, fled, I know not whither.",This address occasioned an alteration in the looks of the other, from a haughty fierceness, they softened into an appearance of compaf- sion and curiosity. ' Is it poifble (akedl he) that fIe has not acquainted you with her motives for withdrawing, nor where fie in- tends to reside ?"," Neither (replied he j) fie bids me adieu for ever, will never fee me more, and desires me to forget her as unworthy of my affection; for Heaven's fake tell me if you can divine the cause of this cruel, unaccountable con- duct."," Indeed I cannot (answered Rhodophil.) Some weeks ago ihe was low spirited and melancholy, then she had fits one night, blt in two or three days got better, and seemed more tranquil; it is certain her disposition has been very unequal, the cause of which I could never rightly comrprehend."," Good God ! (exclaimed the other) it is very strange, her letter seems to imply as if,Ihs
she had behaved imprudently, yet surely it is impossible;","So.tthing certainly lay heavy upon her mind (said the Count;) women are inexpli- cable beings,; /e may have deceived you; I do not liy ile has, because I know nothing; but some cause there must be, and all that I can advise you is, to forget her.," How easy to advise where the heart is not interested! To forget is a hard lesson, memory given to us for a blessing, but too often proves the source of the bitterest for- row; and my hopes of happiness are clouded for ever. One only request I have now to make."," What is it?" asked Rhodophil, with some emotion. " As the unfortunate Clau- dina has entirely secluded herself, tell me, has fie the means for her support,?" The other hesitated a moment, then taking the paper from his pocket, which he had been gazing on, he gave it into his hands, that will satisfy you," said he. These were the con- tents;,H 5 TO
TO COUNT RHODOPHIL. " When this reaches you, I shall have bid the world adieu for ever; my much injured husband never will incur the wrath of Hea- ven for his attachment to a worthless woman after this day-I shall fee him no more.," The settlement you made on me is in the hands of Ernest; half of that fum I shall fend for quarterly, but no clue will be found by that means to trace me; I have taken my measures too securely for any pof- fibility of a discovery: The other half of that settlement I have made over in trust to Ernest for the education of my son. May he never.hear that he has a mother existing! t'wo persons only know the place of my re- treat, they know all! They are sworn to secrecy, and never will be bribed to betray their trust if provoked they may fay too mnuch.," May Heaven comfort, bless, and pre- serve Ferdinand and my child! I would ex- teld my blefings, but they may prove curses;,from
from a wretch. like me all good wilhes may be reversed; yet Heaven will distinguish be- tween the innocent and the guilty ; the ' awful voice' convinced me of that truth, and bids me fly from the world for ever! May the warning be extended to others guilty as my- self.,CLAUDINA." Strange mystery!" cried Ferdinand; those two persons that ' know all!' What is that dreadful all? 0, how torturing is this doubt! Ernest is one (he has confesSed it) that enjoys her confidence; but he' s de- clared no force on earth shall induce himi to betray her. Who the other is I know not; but no doubt The was well advised in her choice of confidants. Her own words pro- nounce her 'guilty,' but of what? What guilt can jhe have committed? Where had flhe the opportunity ?",I- It is in vain to puzzle ourselves with conjectures," answered Rhodophil; "time only can develop the myflery, and we must endeavour to be content until that period,H 6 arri yes
arrives; some unexpeced incident may bring all things to light. You fee she will not be without a support, which I shall regularly pay. As for your son Charles, I take upon me the care of his fortune, and will fend him to a school at my own expence; the moiety of his mother's settlement shall be paid to Ernest, and be left to accumulate for his ex- pences hereafter.,' This has been a melancholy visit to you, my dear Ferdinand ; but I entreat you to endeavour, if possible, to overcome this _hock, to think of Claudina as dead, and as one whom you ought not, from her own confesion, to lament.",Vvith a deep sigh Ferdinand replied, "I will eindavcur; but the more I think, the more the myvfery increases, and the more wretched I am. I thank you for my poor Charles; the little Claudina, I trust, her mo- ther will not negle&. Within three days I shall leave you.",," How! (cried the Count)in three:days Surely my brother will not desert me: Let,u.s
us comfort each other, resign your commis- sion, partake an equal share with me, and let me have the fati-faEtion of contributing to your returning peace. We will take a tour into Hungary; I have an estate there I have never seen. You will be amused. Pray oblige me."," I thank you most sincerely (answered Ferdinand ;) but my resolution is taken, and I intend to ramble, I neither know nor care where, chance shall be my guide."," That is a ridiculous, romantic idea (said the Count;) you may encounter a thousand accidents by such a scheme, with scarce a possibility of being amused without a com- panion, or any plan in view." Ferdinand made but a fight answer, yet sufficient to convey his determination, and the entrance, of company drove him from the room.,Ernest only was admitted into his confi- dence, and with him he consulted about the disposal of his son Charles. As there was an excellent academy at Baden, they thought it best he Ihould be there, because Ernest," would
would have him under his eye.-" My years are great (said the good old man, between sixty and seventy, and my days may be few, but whilst I live, never will I remit my at- tention to him. I have a nephew, a young man of integrity, who is the third master in that very academy: I can depend upon his care there, and here I will watch over his interests. I am certain the Count will not discharge me now.","Why nlow, more than before?" asked Ferdinand.," Because, because (said he, a little con- fused, conscious that he had said too much) he does justice to my fidelity, and is certain of my attachment to his family." Satisfied with this aniwer, the other consulted with him on his projected ramble, and as Ernest found him determined, he made no efforts to oppose him in a pursuit that he thought would amuse him for a time, and, like all other novelties, soon lubfide; and what made him the more readily come into it was, that an account arrived of a truce being agreed upon,between
between the Emperor and his opponent, and that the troops were ordered into winter quar- ters, consequently there was no necessity for resigning his commission, as he might have leave of absence for a few months.,Rhodophil appeared to regret his design, yet nevertheless furnished him with a handsome fum for his expences, and requested he would draw freely upon him whenever it was ne- ceffary. Charles was informed his mother was gone a journey (and after a time Ernest was to acquaint him that she was dead.) - The fame information was circulated in the family, though not as readily believed, for every one concluded she was run away from her husband unknown to them all: But Charles, who was only three years old, gave easy credit to any thing he was told, and in his new situation, where Mr. Denloff, the nephew of Ernest,. paid him the attention of a father, and he had a variety of young com- panions (a thing quite new to him) he soon ceased to lament the loss of his real parents, and was delighted with the change ofrefidence.,CHAP.
CHAP. X. F ERDINAND was impatient to be gone,from the Castle, and within ten days after Claudina had disappeared he saw his son fixed, heard from Ernest that his mother and the little Claudina were well, and having taken leave of his brother, who requested to hear often from him, one fine morning, equipped only with a change or two of linen, which he contrived to put in his pockets, a flout sick, and a small pair. of pocket. pistols, he set off on his intended pedestrian tour. - Ernest accompanied him to the entrance of the forest, and when Ferdinand embraced,the
the good old man, tears rolled down his aged cheeks: May Heaven preserve you, my dearest matter, when there is only a choice of evils, we mufl endeavour to bear with that which appears the lightest ; I therefore trust you to Providence rather than to the wicked and malignant. Take care of your- self, and depend upon my love and fidelity," His increasing emotions precluded farther words on either fide. Ferdinand wrung his hand affetionarely, and unable to repress his own tears, they, as if by mutual content, turned and walked hastily from each other, the one to the Castle, the other pursued his way through the forest.,He walked leisurely on for some hours without feeling fatigue, for his mind was wholly occupied with revolving on all the extraordinary occurrences that had happened since the death of the late Count, and al- though he had never given credit to the im- probable stories of ghosts, or believed in the old legends handed down to posterity by the laves of fear and monkish superstition ; yet,thero
there was such a conviction in his mind, that he could not be deceived in the voice which three times had startled him; and the last time was not only heard by Claudina, but appeared from her own letters to have struck her with a sense of conscious guilt, (though of what nature he could not divine) that it was impossible there could be any misapprehension, where there was no fear, or expectation of terror. All was strange and inexplicable, and he found himself in- volved in a labyrinth of perplexity, without any clue to guide him through it.,He at length came to alfide of the forest which had a very steep hill, or rather moun- tain, rising from a narrow valley, which was watered by a small fiream that seemed to meander slowly round the fides of the hill beyond the view; here Ferdinand stopped, and for the first moment recolledte'd that he was tired and faint for want of refreshment, which, though a very natural occurrence, he had never apprehended; and Ernest con- cluded, without inquiring, that he would,take
take the right-hand fide of the forest, where two or three little hamlets lay dispersed, and would afford him some accommodation. - He viewed the mountain with a wearied eye, beyond the little valley the forest was very thick, nor did he know its termination; the other fide he was acquainted with, but here he was entirely at a loss: Whilfi he delibe- rated, he feated hinmfelf on a piece of the rock, where he had refled but a few moments before he heard the tinkling of'a bell, and presently several sheep came to the opposite fide of the rivulet; they flopped, looking at him, as if afraid of a firanger:--" Poor, simple animals! (exclaimed he) fear not a wretched, powerless man! Alas! thy very looks claim pity, io void of guile, hard and callous must that heart be grown, whose pro- session leads him to put the murderous knife to a throat so unoffending !",He had scarcely finished those words, when he saw a young shepherdess descending from the mountain to attend the watering of her flocks. He marked her as the came nearer;,plain
plain and humble was her attire, simple and unfafhioned her air; a good height, and a clear brown flin, with a ruddy complexion, were all her attractions. " Behold the child of nature ! (thought he;) innocence of heart, simplicity of manners !" She came down to her Iheep, the small rivulet only parted them. He saluted her. She returned a rustic bow, looking earneflly on him: " I have loft my way, shepherdess, and am faint and tired."," Go round the hill (said (he, pointing with her finger) there is a little bridge, cross it, follow the path way, it will bring you up to our cottage, my father is there, and you may ret yourself."," And you (said he) where do you dwell!" " There also (answered she.) When I have watered and housed my Iheep, I shall come there too.",Ferdinand did not hesitate; he walked slowly z.2 the bridge, and with difficulty began to climb the winding ascent. After much fatigue he reached a kind of platform in the,middle
middle of the hill, where he saw a small cottage, a deep hanging brow of the moun- tain seemed suspended over it, and appeared as if every moment it would fall, and crulh the humble dwelling into dust. He fhud- dered as he beheld it; but advancing to the cottage, saw a venerable looking man fitting to enjoy the breezes that played over the hills.,The old man viewed him with evident surprise; Ferdinand related the direction he had obtained friom the shepherdess, and ap- peared so very much spent with toil, that the shepherd desired he would walk in, gave him his own stool as being the best, brought him some milk, and a cake, he said, of his Maria's baking. Never was repast more delicious than this milk, when almost choaked with thirst ; Ferdinand drank the wholesome beverage, looked at the simple shepherd, and his humble dwelling clean and comforta- ble, though unadorned, with delight. " My good father (said he) I thank your hofpi- tality, you have revived my fainting spirits.","You
' You are truly welcome (replied the shepherd;) but may I inquire, son, where you are going to on foot, and alone, for, it is too late to reach Baden now before the close of night ?"," I camefrom Baden (said Ferdinand) and am going I know not whither; going to travel."," To travel ?" " Yes." " What on foot-alone ?" " And why not, father ? I go to fee the country, to amuse myself, a horse would be sometimes inconvenient, for instance, a horse could not have brought me here."," No (replied the old man;) but was there a necessity that you/hould come here ?"," Not a necessity to come here particu- larly; but I am on a tour of curiosity, and therefore the lowly valley, or the towering mountain, will equally attrat me; I can never be out of my way."," Strange (said the shepherd, eying him attentively) strange, that a young man, who,seems
seems formed for the world, should take a fancy to roam the forests on foot, without a companion or necessaries to refresh him !"," The first I want not (said Ferdinand) and for the last I trust to benevolence and hospitality, such as I now experience."," But fippofe you had not met my daugh- ter, your trut would have been a very feeble one, for I know not another hut for a great way off, and you would have been benighted in the forest. Think of your danger in that cafe."," Could we always foresee (observed Ser- dinand) we might possibly avoid many difa- greeable accidents, many melancholy circum- fiances; but no such prescience is allowed to man, and if it was, and the evils of life un- avoidable, we should be still more wretched than we are."," True (answered the old man;) but had I guessed you was coming here, I might have been better prepared, for we eat up our eggs at dinner; bread and milk is all your fare.",'c I
" I desire no better, and if you will per- mit me to lay on that bench till the morning dawns, I shall be itill more obliged to you."," Thank Heaven (said the shepherd) I can treat you better; to lay on the floor, wrapped up in warm skins, is nothing new, nor uncomfortable to me, and my poor bed is at your service; it is clean, though home- ly." Ferdinand was going to refute, when the shepherdess entered. - After some conversation on their simple way of life, which he found they had always been accuf- tomed to, they overpowered all his refusals, and obliged him to take the old man's bed, which was in one corner of the room; the other room was the young woman's, and those two rooms were all they had.,He asked " if they were not apprehensive of the rock breaking over their cottage ?" They said, " Sometimes, when sudden thun- der-ftorms broke over them they were alarmed; but they trusted in Heaven for protection. I have only one fear, one care, (said the shepherd i) it is some years now,since
since I loft my wife ; ihould I be taken fud- denly too, what must become of my poor child ?"," Whenever that day arrives, father, which I hope is yet far off, I will fell my sheep, and go to service; all my fear is, left I should be tick, and not able to help you; but then I hope good Mr. Ernest, our Lord's steward, will confider you."," What! (cried Ferdinand) do you know Ernest ? Are you tenants to Count Rho- dophil ?"," To be sure, Sir (answered the girl ) we know Mr. Ernest, for he buys our sheep.- As to tenants, Sir, we pay no rent, because the mountain is free to live in but we are vassals to the Count, his estate lies round the forift."," Do you ever go to the Castle ?" asked he again.," I never did but once (replied the shep- herdefs) and the walk is too long for my father; but Mr. Ernest fends to us some- times, and me meet him in the valley, and,VOL. . I agree
agree about our sheep. He is a good man, and never drives a hard bargain with the poor."," Well (said Ferdinand) I know him too, and will take care that both you and your father ihall be more safely provided for in future." Each looked at the other with wonder, but spoke not. They soon after retired to reft, contented and happy j not so their guest, he flung himself on the bed; a prey to the most melancholy refleEtions; and it was near morning when nature exhausted, gave him a temporary repose for about three hours, which seemed to refiefh him, and after breakfasting on milk, he prepared to renew his ramble.,He was but very little acquainted with that fide of the country, which being rocky and mountainous, was unfavourable to excursions on horseback, and therefore had not fallen under his observation; but just as he was taking leave of his hospitable entertainers, he remembered to have heard there was a convent situated somewhere beyond this,mountain;
mountain; that certainly (thought he) is the retreat of Claudina: I will go to it, perhaps she will not fee me, but it will be a fatisfac- tion to know where file is. He inquired of the fhephelrdefs if his conjeEture was right refpeóting the convent ? She told him it was, that about seven miles off there was a con- vent so remote and dreary, that it seemed thut out from the world, and was almost as much unknown as if in a desert.",( I have never been near it (said The) for, indeed; what I have heard about it is enough for me, and I have something else to do than to ramble into such places, where one may get nothing but a great fiight for one's pains. Ah! (concluded Ferdinand) this is the very place which seems to be de- signed for an entire seclusion from the world, there I will diret my steps." Having bid adieu to the good girl and her father, and taking a direction towards the convent, he began to descend the hill. The morning was fine, the dew drops still hung upon the under-wood, sparkling as the rising fun glit-,1 2 tered
tered among the trees, the birds were singing on the lofty branches, and the whole scene was calculated to inspire pleasure and serenity; even Ferdinand felt the enthusiasm of the moment; he looked round with delight: - " Ah ! (said he) the face of nature fines on all its children; happy is the mind that can enjoy the pure plealures that it so freely offers, free from corroding care, or guilty felf-upbraidings ! How much happier is the lowly peasant than his proud guilty Lord, who riots in unlawful pleasures, forgetful of the fting that fbllows in the voice of con- science; whilst the humble shepherd rifes blith and innocent, pursues his daily occupa- tion, blessld with content, he gathers in his flock at night, thankfully partakes the health- ful food his family provides, and finks to reft undisturbed and happy !",Full of thfee thoughts he pursued his way until he reached the foot of the mountain, and descended into a narrow, wild and ob- fcure glen, where nothing relieved the eye but high and lofty hills covered with trees,,which
which threw a dark shade beneath, and en- tirely obscured the fun from penetrating through ; he heard the found ofdiftant waters, but knew not fiom whence they came. He walked on a considerable way, until by a sudden turning he found himself at the foot of another mountain, from whence issued the most beautiful water-fall he had ever seen, descending into two or three natural bafons, which fell from one to the other until they came to the bottom, and formed the lake, which winding itself around the mountain on the opposite fide, divided into smaller streams of which the rivulet he had first seen was one. Here he fat down to reft, and to ad- mire the course of the water. He had an- other hill to mount, and he observed there was something like a path-way in a gradual ascent round the fide of it; he could fee it was not much trodden upon by the weeds, but they were not so high as to impede his steps, and therefore, after refting about half an hour, he followtd the direction, made his,13 way
way through the weeds and under-wood, and,. with infinite labour, arrived at the summit.,Here he flopped to look round him, an- other valley was beneath, which seemed to. terminate in a thick wood on the right, and more hills to the left. Heartily tired of ascending and descending, he resolved to go into the woods from the vale beneath, rather than climb another mountain: Descending, however, to the valley, his attention was arrested by the beauty of the vines, which entirely covered the southern fide of the hill; and several finall streams, which had forced their way from the cascade on the other fide, here crossed each other in the valley,, and divided it into many parts like a cluster of small vales, which had a beautiful effet upon the eye, and agreeably amused Ferdi- nand till he came to the entrance of the wood, which he found uncommonly thick, and seemingly difficult to penetrate. He hesitated a moment, supposing that it might be the retreat of a troop of banditti, which had for some time past committed many out-,rages
rages in the neighbourhood of Baden : " But what have I to fear ? (exclaimed he) my life is not worth the taking; fiom a single man they can expe& no booty, and the basest of cowards only would attack a defenceless being that cannot injure them.",Fortified by there considerations, he pro- ceeded through the wood, in which there was no path-way, and in many places so dif- ficult to pervade, that he more than once repented of his attempt, which he was fear- ful would at last prove fruitless; persevering, however, with infinite difficulty, he walked on. The trees were very lofty, and it ap- peared as if he descended gradually all the way. For three hours he kept on, till quite exhausted, he was obliged to reft himself at the foot of a tree, and eat a small cake the shepherdess had given him. " I have no doubt (thought he) but that I must be near the convent, as it certainly lies in this direc- tion, though most probably there may be a less troublesome road to it. They informed me at the cottage it was about seven miles,I 4 from
from the hill, surely I must have walked over more ground than that :" But he confidered not how much time he had loft in forcing his way through the wood, which impeded his feps, and made him advance but very slowly.,Having a little refreshed himself he went on, and at length the wood opened into a deep and narrow valley, with lofty thick pines on each fide, which threw a gloom over it sufficient to create horror in the mind of the boldest traveller.,Ferdinand felt its influence, but he was not easily intimidated, nor, indeed, could he now well retreat. Walking forward, he saw at the bottom another thick cluster of trees, which, when he came up to them, seemed to terminate the valley, and to be impervious to any human being. These were chefnut- trees, so interwoven with each other, that he looked round in vain for an opening, for the under-wood formed a thick fence that was impassable. - Extremely disconcerted, and apprehensive left he should have the fame,road
road through the valley to retrace, he turned a little to the left, forcing his way down by the fide of the trees, and after persevering near a quarter of a mile with infinite diffi- culty, to his great joy he discovered a small stream of water, over which was an old wooden bridge that led the way to a narrow path made through the wood. This track he followed, and, after walking near an hour, came to another dark avenue, at the end of Mhich stood an old building encompassed with very high walls.,"At last (thought he) I have reached the convent ;" and exhausted as he was with toil and want of refreihment, the appearance of those mouldering walls, gave him more pleasure than he might at another time have received from a view of the most superb palace. A pair of iron gates, which seemed ruiled on their hinges, with a bell on one !(ie, flattered him with the hopes of obtain- ing an entrance: He rang the bell with some force, and heard its found, though at some 'iftance. After waiting a considerable time,,1 5 he
he was about to repeat the pull, when a very small wicket was opened (for the inside of the gates were lined with wood) and the meagre face of an old man appeared, who demanded, in a deep, -feeble voice, "Who was there ?",(" A wearied and unfortunate traveller, (replied Ferdinand) who entreats reft and refreshment."," I fear (replied the man) neither can be obtained here."," Is not this a convent ?" afled Ferdi- nand.," No (answered the other) there is a con- vent about five miles to the right of the valley you have passed."," What then is this place ?" " Once a catle, now a heap of ruins !" c Yet it is inhabited it seems, and I am really so overcome with fatigue, that if you can procure me entrance, I shall be moat truly thankful to reft an hour."," I will inquire," said the man, and with- drew,,Ferdinand
Ferdinand was.extremely mortified to find he had taken a wrong diretion, from the convent as it appeared, by keeping to the left; yet he was so very languid and tired, that he found it hardly possible to measure his fleps back without some reft or fufte- nance ; for, however grief may fill up the mind, or weaken the appetite, nature will assert her rights, and remind the woe-begone traveller that something is necessary for her support. He waited some minutes, not with the patience of a Socrates, when at length the fame face appeared through the hole: " I will let you in for a Ihort time to the huntsman's room, but no farther." He pro- ceeded to unbar the gate, which from its fcreeking noise, and the difficulty attending its opening,. gave evident proofs that the praEtice of hospitality wa not customary in that ruinous building.,When the gate was opened Ferdinand absolutely fiarted at the figure of his con- ductor; he even hesitated whether he flould follow him i haggard, emaciated and tottering,,16 was
was the man before him. A large court, overgrown with weeds, led to another wall, with a pair of gates similar to those he had passed, and discovered no more of the build- ing than the lofty battlements and high turrets he had discerned on his first approach. On one fide of the court was an old low building, to which the man conduEted him. They entered a hall lined with the huntsman's trophies, covered with duff; through that tI'Pv went into a smaller room, where a table, some benches, and a fire place, had the ap- pearance of having been once inhabited.- " You may reft here (said the man) and I will bring you some food; but if you flir one ftep beyond, your death will be the con- sequence.",Ferdinand, initead of being intimidated found his curiosity greatly excited, and though he quietly acquiesced with the prohibition, yet his thoughts were employed in confi- dering on means to obtain further knowledge of these ruins and its inhabitants. Some time elapsed before the man returned with bread,,wine,
wine, and grapes, which, whilst Ferdinand gladly devoured, he was observed, with the most scrutinizing attention, by his entertainer; nor were the other's eyes unemployed.- When he put the aflak of wine to his moutlr, for no cup had been thought neceflary, he drank to the other's health, which was re- turned with a bow of the head; but no per- suasions could induce him to return the compliment. " I drink no wine," said he, in a mournful voice.,Indeed, my good friend, I think you need it," said Ferdinand, " weak and feeble as you are, wine seems absolutely neceflary for you."," I have sworn to the contrary," replied the other, with an increased dejestion.," It appears to me," returned Ferdinand, " to have been a very cruel injunction, if forced upon you, and a very unwise one, if voluntarily made, for the good things of this life were given to us by a bounteous Creator to be our support and comfort; the abuse of them is only improper, and when advanced,in
in age, as you appear to be, such things as nouriah the body and enliven the lpirits, are highly requisite.","To some persons," answered the man, " it may be lo; but not to a man to whom the hours that he drags here are a weary pilgrimage, such a one seeks not by ftimu- latives to prolong a life long since grown hateful to him.","( Alas!" cried Ferdinand, "few men can be more wretched-than myself; recent affitions have driven me from my,home, and from my friends; yet do I hold it cow- ardly to desert my post, I have no power over that life I could not give myself; and to neglea the means of its preservation, is little less sinful than to destroy .it at once, - But, pardon me one question, are you the owner of this Castle ?"," I am not," returned the other; .".but do not be curious in matters that cannot con- cern you, nor by an idle curiosity which can receive no gratification, oblige me to repent .of my charity.",6 You
C" You must at least," said Ferdinand, " for- give me one observation your first appear- ance, and manner of bringing me here, led me to suppose you a domeflic; your language convinces me I was mistaken: Whoever, or whatever you are, if you are unfortunate, as your words seem to imply, I moft.fincerely pity you; unhappy myfeif, I can feel for every child of sorrow." The tone, in which- those words were uttered, with the look that accompanied them, had a powerful effec upon his auditor. He turned from him,. clasped his hands, tears run in torrents down his furrowed cheeks, and, . with a heart- breaking sigh, he flung himself upon a bench almost suffocated with the excels of his emo-- tions.,Ferdinand approached him :-" If 7have been, though involuntarily, the cause of ex- citing those tears, and of recalling ideas that perhaps were faded on the memory, I entreat you to forgive me; indebted to your hofpi- tality and kindness, I am exceedingly con- cerned to have made a return so unworthy
to create pain in the bofor of my bene- fa&or."," You tand acquitted in my opinion," answered he, endeavouring to recover fro'n his first transports ; "i sympathy, perhaps, iJl you to obcervations you could not torele would plunge me into sorrow. It is now twelve years since I have sIen a human being to interest me; twice only during that pericd have those gates, by which you entered, been opened to admit any one within them: So- ciety is hateful to me, and I thought this place fuffciently hidden irrm the world to preclu e all poffibiiity of intrusion the found of a bell is but fcidom heard,.and only at {lated times: I \was therefore alarmed at the circuiftance, and when I opened the wicket had no thoughts of admitting you; but the exprelfion of your countenance firuck me, the mournful accents of your fupplica- tivn vibrated to my heart, and in one moment overturned the scrupulous caution of twelve years."," I
I feel (replied Ferdinand) that my obli- gations to you are infinite, nor will I abute them by an exprfeion of curiosity which is improper to be gratified ; not one ftep be- yond the boundaries of your injunaions will I attempt to stray.,May Heaven give you comfort, and sooth your mind to e.ase and tranquillity. I am rambling to forget myself, and those most dear to me. I have incurred the heaviest raledistions, and am a vitim to the ieverity of them. A cruel mystery hangs over me, and has driven me from every prospeCt of happiness."," Poor youth !" exclaimed the old man, " how many are the unfortunate beings com- pelled to exist in this world of cares, either from their own mifcondu&, or through the crimes of others ? I can afford you no com- fort, for within there walls misery, opprefflon, and despair, have fixed their feat for ever !"," Then," cried Ferdinand, " I fIould be an inmate; for equally wretched and hope- less is the being before you: 1 know not why,it
it is, but methinks I am driven by an irre- fiftible impulse to open my heart to you, if you can allow me to intrude so long upon your patience.," The communication of sorrow, it is said, relieves the mind; if fuck may be the effect, I will readily liften to you; but must premise before-hand that of whatsoever na- ture your sorrows may be, it is impossible that I can either comfort, or serve you."," They will at least prove to you," an- '.vered Ferdinand, " that you:are not alone unhappy, and though you cannot, indeed it is impofible you hould, serve me, you may at least give me the benefit of your advice.",The old man shook his head, but with a deep sigh requested he would proceed. The other obeyed, and took up his fiory from the first time he had seen Claudina, as the epoch from which originated all his fubfe- quent troubles, and from which he dated her misfortunes and his own. He related every event without palliation or exaggera- tion, and complained heavily of the mystery,which
which hung over the interview with his wife on his return fiom the army, and the self- accusation contained in her letters, her flight,. and his ignorance of her situation.,C H A P. XL PsT HE stranger heard him with much.,attention, and when the narrative was concluded made the following, reply. " Your imprudent marriage with a stranger, unknown to your father, was the source from whence flowed all your misfortunes, consequently from that wrong ftep you may trace every. ill in progression. I do.not however excul- pate him from blame in being so rash and unadvised, as to draw upon you. the evils,or
of life by a father's curses; the idea is hor- ribie, it is usurping the power of the Most High, to whom oiAy curies belongeth; yzt I have rarely observed through life, that an union, contra&ed contrary to a parent's ap- probation, has been fortunate or happy; to a mind of sensibility there must ever be a drawback from felicity, when conscious of giving pain, and diapponinting the belt hopes of those so nearly intercftcd for our happi- ness, and who have a right to more than a negative obedience, if I may so express my- self, when a marriage is contracted without consulting the parents; but when completed, contrary to their wilhes and. commands; few, I am convinced, are the instances of ma- trimonial happiness: But I tie I oppress you, therefore, to drop that point, permit me to observe, you did wrorg in not seeking op- portunities to soften your father. Was your brother a warm advocate, think you ? I fear not; much less can I believe that a good rman could have left the world without being in charity with it, and revoking, as far as,he
he could, the imprecation his passion had dictated.," As to the other circumflances, the voice at different times, so applicable to your situ- ations, I hfall only observe, tlat they were very extraordinary, but not impofible. - Respecting your wife, i fear much black treachery remains concealed, beyond your penetration; her flight, after hearing the pro- hibition of the voice, confirms my conjec- tures. 0, you know not (said he, starting from his feat) you know not to what excesses a corrupted heart may be driven !",He paced about the room for two or three minutes, then suddenly froppin;g: - " The leading features towards explaining the par- ticular circumstances of your story are want- ing; it is impoflible I can give any advice that ought to influence you in your future conduct or sentiments. Your wife may be in the neigihbouring convent, but I fee not what you can promise yourself fiom the dif- covery. btcaufe it is not at all probable that she will fee you: I sincerely wish you return-,ing
ing happiness, and am sorry I must remind you that your departure from hence is necef. fary before the day is too far advanced; you must return through the valley, and take the opposite direcion towards the con- vent, 'which is nearly as much retired as this melancholy place.",Ferdinand arose: " I beg your pardon," aid he, " for obliging you to remind me that I have trespassed too long on your kind- ness: I feel regret at leaving you in this folicary desolated mansion, and yet, such is the complexion of my mind, I could be contented to remain in it mytllf with such a companion.",L" ea've me (replied the other) add not to the horrors of my situation by permitting me to taste the solace of a companion from which I am for ever excluded."," Howe (said Ferdinand) are you then here alone ? Did you not fay that you was not master here ?",sty
c" I told you that I was nor the owner of this castle: I spoke truth; inq'ir no farther." As his brow grew contrafdci, his eyes wild, and his whole figure agitastd, Ferdinand re- .prefied his curiolity, and prepared to depart. The other attended him to the gate with a fort of fullen civiiity, and opened it without speaking. Ferdinand took his hand, " Hea- vens bless you," said he, " I thank your charity. Must we never meet again ?" The supplicating tone melted the hardened heart of the stranger, his features relaxed :-" Why should you wish it ?"," Not from an unwarrantable curiosity," returned the other, " not from a wifli to pe- netrate farther into your secrets, or your habitation, than you would choose to allow of; but from sympathy, from a desire of participating in sorrow, and a wish to render your situation less deplorable by the converse of a fellow sufferer.",The man paused, viewed Ferdinand from head to foot with a searching eye, opened his mouth to speak, again paused, and turned from,him.
him. The other feeing his emotions, was also afftted : " I have affliced you unde- fignedly; pardon me (added he) I will not be intrusive, I submit to your reftriEioris." He was turning from the gate, the stranger caught his hand: "You have overcome (laid he) my hitherto invincible resolutions; you have awakened sensations long, very long strangers to my bosom: I will corifider, I must have time to reflect, and to determine, I can promise nothing; go to the convent, latisfy your anxiety refpeding your wife. - Return to this gate to-morrow, I fiall by that time decide on your withes, and either wholly repress my own riling inclination, or gratify it without reserve; but expe& nothing, for I make no promifcs." He haflily shut the gate without waiting for an answer,' and left Ferdinand under a great perturbation of ipirits.,He had now to retrace his tfeps through the gloomy valley, and force his way through the woodlands, The various conjectures that occupied his mind relative to the old,man,
man, and his ruinous solitary mansion, lessened the apparent difficulties, and tedious length of the road. He regained the foot of the mountain, and turned to the right, where he met with a chain of small rocky hills both painful and dangerous to climb, and to de- scend from, and which so far impeded h's haste, that he saw the twilight drawing on fait, and the appearance of the heavy clouds portending rain or snow. He redoubled his speed, and on coming over a pretty high hill discovercd a grove ofchefnut trees before him, in the midst of which he saw something rising above them like a turret. " At last, (cried he, almost exhausted with fatigue) at last I have found the convent." The object in view seemed to diminish the distance, and he walked for some time through the grove before he arrived at a large moat, which ex- tended round the walls of the building. - He took a circular walk, in the hope, which was not disappointed, of finding a bridge.- On one fide was a narrow Rone causeway made on piles, but more resembling a path-,VOL. i. K way
way than a bridge ; this he crossed to the gate that appeared in the wall, and rung the bell.,The door was almost instantly opened by the porterefs, and to his great joy he found himself at the desired port. She seemed ex- tremely surprised at feeing him, and demanded his business. " Was there not a young Lady brought here within this fortnight " said he.," There was (she replied) and what then ?"," I beseech you (said he) to tell her, her nearest relation withes to speak with her."," 'Tis very improbable a relation should come here to fee her. Young man, you have not spoken the truth ; nor will you, whoever you are, be permitted to fee her."," Oh! (cried Ferdinand, off his guard, and agonized by vexation and fatigue) oh! tell her it is her husband, it is the father of her child; she has no right to withdraw her- self from me, nor canyou answer it, to detain,a
a wife from her husband without his know- ledge or consent.",The porterefs seemed staggered. ' What you assert (replied fle) seems very ftrangc and improbable; I will, however, report it to the Abbess, which is all I cani do in the business.",She shut the grate, and left him ovcr- whelmed with vexation. He was now con- vinced that Claudina was here, and could he fee her, and obtain from her fatisfation relative to her felf-accufation, and a consef- sion of the real motives which had induced her to leave the Castle under such an ap- pearance of mystery, he concluded that he should be much easier in his mind, and fubiit patiently to a separation which feetred to have been commanded, though why at thatparticul4r period he could not conceive, and was what he supposed a conversation with her would clear up. During the absence of the por- terefs, his mind dwelt on these circumstances; the grate was at length opened, and the old woman appeared.,K (', The
" The young Lady refuses to fee you; she denies that you have any authority over her; bids you remember the dreadful circunaiznces lately psed, and never presume to trouble her more. The letter ihe left for you sufficiently explained her sentiments: Her child is with her, but it has no longer a father, nor after this day will any messages from you be re- ceived or delivered here."," Barbarous woman !" exclaimed Ferdi- nand, " ungrateful and unjut ! Would she but explain herself with openness and can- dour, I could submit to the ' dreadful cir- uminftances' she alludes to; but this silence, this mystery, and my child too ! It has no longer a father!' Just Heaven, how am I punilhed !",I am sorry for you," said the porterefs; " but I cannot help you. Night is drawing on; a short distance to the left is a convent of Friars, there you may be accommodated for the night; but return no more here, for it avails nothing to complain where you can- not be heard." She shut the grate, and,left
left lerdinand standing in an attitude of fixed delpair.,He stood for some moments insensible to every thing around him, when the found of a distant bell routed him from the torpor that had seized him, and infantly recollecting the convent mentioned by the old Nun, with reluctant steps, and an oppressed mind, he walked through the wood, keeping to the left as the had directed him; but over- whelmed by a thousand doubts and painful conjectures, he proceeded so slowly that night overtook him, and it was with much diffi- culty he espied through the trees a rising hill before him which terminated the wood, and on reaching to the foot of it, he per- ceived an old building on one fide of the declivity, with large pieces of rock suspended over it, which seemed to threaten hourly danger: He recolle&ted the shepherd's cot- tage; "strange (thought he) that people should chufe such dangerous situations to eret dwellings on! It appears to me a daring presumption, or a total inlenfibility." He,K 3 rang
rang the bell, a small gate was opened by a Friar, Ferdinand announced himself as an xlifortu.nate and wearied triveller seeking f·eltcr from thle inclemencies of the night.," Enter, my ion, and welcome," said the father. Seldom does the traveller find his way to our solitary mansion, so remote and distant from any great road ; enter therefore freely, and partake of our homely fare, and humble lodging." Ferdinand followed his conductor to a large room, where several of the Fathers were affembledjuft returned from their evening vespers. All but one saluted him, and withdrew, that one advanced, and requested he would be feated. Some bread, fallad, milk and fruit, were brought in, of which Ferdinand partook very sparingly, for the uneasiness of his mind had destroyed his appetite.,"You look fatigued, my son," said the Friar, " and I suppose must have wandered considerably out of your way to have arrived at this dwelling, seldom in the habit of re- ceiving strangers."," I
" I have indeed been wandering about," replied the other, " and with very little satis- faftion to myfeif. To this house I was di- reced from a neighbouring convent; both houres are so remote, so impervious, even to the eye of curiosity, from the woods and deep vallies, that only a wretched fugitive, like myself, could possibly have found it."," If you are unhappy, my son, I am sorry for you, but yield not to despair; bope is implanted in the mind of man by our great Creator as the sweetener of life, and only one set of beings are excluded from that cor- dial drop in earthly pursuits,"," And who are those ?" asked Ferdinand. " Men and women devoted to a monastic life," answered the Father; " cut off from every worldly expectation, their hopes are founded in heavenly promires which can re- ceive no disappointment but from themselves; they depend not on others; no earthly views can distraCt their attention from the one great object of their wishes: Happiness unalloyed,K4 by
by fears or doubts muff inhabit the bosom of a religious man.","Most true," replied Ferdinand; c but that man muff be detached from worldly cares, muff have no dear connexions that twine about the heart; no wife, no children; no agonizing apprehensions for those he loves; no. diffra&ting doubts he cannot comprehend. The man who secludes himself from iociety, who can devote his days to religious duties only, must have a heart and mind at ease, ere he can embrace such a life as you have chosen."," Alas! my son, and does not religion bold out comfort to the afflicted ?"," Undoubtedly, that is the rock on which we muff erecE the foundation of all our hopes and expectations both here and hereafter; but a monastic life I frill aver, should be fought for only by those free from the ties that nature binds about the heart, and who have ceased to be solicitous for worldly ob- jects.",This
This conversation was interrupted by the entrance of another. Friar, not so old as the one before him, in whose countenance Ser- dinand discerned traits of benevolence and sensibility, his heart sprung to meet him, and involuntarily he arose as if to do him homage.," Father Joseph," said the former one, with a supercilious air, " you will fee this traveller comfortably lodged, and then attend your duty :" Turning to Ferdinand, " Son, I shall fee you to-morrow, and hold rome further conversation with you." He withdrew.," You will follow me, my good brother," said Father Joseph, with an air of mildness, taking up the lamp. The other obeyed; he was conduced through an outer court into a very small chamber, about eight feet square, with a bed made in a niche of the wall, a table, on which stood a crucifix, and one stool. "1 May you reft in peace under the protedtion of Heaven !" said the Father, and was going to leave him.," Ah !" exclaimed Ferdinand, and must you go ? I feel a rising wifl to be indulged,K 5 with
with your company; muff I repress it ?" " For the present I am obliged to leave you;. but if sleep is not more desirable than con- veifation, I will return to you in half an. hour. Go to bed, reft if you can, for I fee you are overcome with fatigue." He re- tired, and left his companion with the pleating hope of feeing him again. The countenance of this man beamed with mild complacence,. and Ferdinand. hoped from him to. gather full information respecting the other convent,, and possibly of the ruinous building where he had been so odly received. Not to offend the Friar, he got into the bed, which was pretty hard, and very unlikely to lull him presently to sleep, he therefore anxiously watched for the approach of Father Joseph, ,who came when he had began to despair of feeing him.," I have complied with your wifles, son, and now tell me how I may serve ycu; I have one hour to spare." Ferdinand then briefly repeated the latter part of his. story from the time his wife had left him, his re-,ception
ception at the old Castle, and his treatment at the convent. He concluded with faying, that all he wished for from his wife was, " an explanation of her letter, and a candid con- feflion of her motives for withdrawing her- self from the protetion of her friends.",(( If (said he) " as I suppose, you have communication with the convent, I beseech you to fee my wife, tell her I will not force mryfelf into her pretence, let her but write to free me from my present doubts and in. quietude, and I will obey her orders, and never intrude mytelf into any place she in- habits without her permission."," Your tfory is very strange (observed Father Joseph) and I fear you will obtain no fatisfation ; I have no power to serve you: Our Superior, whom you have been with, is the only one that visits the convent; the order is one of the severest in all Ger- many: Ours is much more relaxed, yet we can derive little advantage from the indul- gence allowed us, because our situation pre- cludes all chance of society, and Father,K b Ambrose
Ambrose only admitted to visit the ccn- vent, to which he is confessor. As your wife is in that retirement, be assured she is dead; to you.. Those that enter that house seldom return again to the world.","Diftraaion!" cried Ferdinand,; "but my child,, they cannot. keep my child from me !"-"( At a certain age she may make her own eletion : Mean time you may represent the cafe to the Biffop,. that is all. you can do,. having taken fanEtuary in the bosom of the church, and the child being at this age more immediately under the care of its mother; at present, you cannot oblige her to resign it." Observing that Ferdinand ap- peared overwhelmed with.vexation,. he went on.,"The building you have mentioned, so- buried from all observation, was once,.I have heard,, a most superb mansion,. inhabited by one of the Bavarian family,, who marrying an heiress of a Suabian Baron, came into the pofeffion of that estate which has long fallen into decay,. nor did I ever. hear. that it bad,been.
been inhabited these twenty years. On the other fide it joins with the black forest, and has been always understood, from its being desolated in one of the late wars, and never repaired, uninhabitable ever since;- the house must be in ruins, and the grounds round it barren and uncultivated. Who the person or persons can be that reside there I have no idea, and indeed I flhould suppose it can afford no accommodations for any other than banditti.",( Or the sons ofmifery," cried Ferdinand, " such are neither delicate in their accom- modations, nor fastidious in their choice of fitations; all places are alike to the wretched, and I hope to-morrow I shall be admitted as an inmate."," And I hope ;ct," returned Father Jo- feph. " My son, you are very young, let not the first disappointment in your calcula- tions of happiness induce you to renounce the world. You have been wrong, perhaps, in your first feleótion of the means to attain it. Man has but little prescience, and that,little
little is often ill-direted.- Confider your present troubles as a chastisement for some misconduct, some rafl actions resulting from the impetuosity of youth; receive the cor- retion with humility, but give not way to despair. Believe me, there is no merit in retiring from the world; society has its claims not incompatible with your sacred duties; on the contrary, duty towards God, and duty towards your brethren, is equally commanded and inculcated.. A.young man may have a thousand opportunities of doing active service to his fellow creatures, and of promoting the cause of religion and v.irtue. Retirement suits not with the ardour of youth; let me advise you therefore to resume your situation in life, whatever it may be, to scan over your palt actions. with. diicrimination and impartiality-; you will then discover the errors that have impeded your expectations of happiness; you will chalk out for your.- feWs a new path, and the end will be mental tranquillity, and the never-fading faitsfacion of.having been beneficial to. the. extent of,your
your abilities towards the less fortunate and happy."," And is this," cried Ferdinand, " the language of a man detached from the world, this the advice of a holy Father, to expose a fluftating, disappointed heart to the allure- ments and dissipations that tempt, in a hun. dred picafurable fllapes, the mind of youth,. and lead him into vice ?"," It is the language of truth and reason,"' answered Father Jofeph,.with energy, "it is the advice of dear-bought wisdom and ex- perience. Man was not intended for a soli- tary being, and a young man, who flies from; the world becanife he has indulged delusive hopes,. and formed expecations that in the nature of them must at one time or other receive a efvere check, who neglects the duties he has it in his power to perform, and by a. ralh and ill-judged misanthropy, shuns man- kind to give up his mind to despair; believe- me,. such. a man is a pusillanimous wretch, who deserts his post, and by his cowardice and impatient spirit, lays up for himlelf bitter,repentance,
repentance, and never-ending regret, that will mix itself in his most earnest devotions, render those acts of religion, which should communicate joy and cheerfulness to the mind, cold, gloomy, and mechanical; whilst the good, the a&ive, the benevolent mind, performs his sacred duties with delight,. from conviction and choice diffuses bleftings to all around him, and by precept and example. animates others to the practice of religion and virtue, which.his conduct renders both easy and pleasant."," If I may judge from the expression of your countenance," said Ferdinand, " your advice is not the declamation of an unimpaf- sioned man, who has forsaken the world from choice, but the warnings of a feeling-heart, desirous of saving others from equal, regret and misery w-ith himself.",cc You have observed justly, I will not deny," anfi.ered the Father: " Many are the victiiTs in this house to pride, impatience, and avarice, sacrificed by their friends, or driven by the impetuosity of their own pas-,sions,
sions. Some there are doubtless from choice and the purest motives, but there I.! are comparatively few; a monastery therefore I do not recommend, nor a residence with that solitary being, whoever he may be, that in- habits those stately ruins even this desultory mode of gratifying your curiosity, rambling among uninhabited and almost impafiable hills and vallies, can benefit neither yourself, nor others, may subjet you to much incon- venience, perhaps to certain dangerous situ- ations, you do not apprehend: Once more then I recommend you to seek an active life, and an occupation that may diversify your thoughts, and engage your attention. Good night, reflect on what I have said, and may Heaven direct you for the best; I will fee you again after morning fcrvice.",The good father having withdrawn, left Ferdinand overwhelmed with a variety of contending emotions, whether to profit by, or disregard the advice he had received; - whether he Ihould yield to the dictates of prudence and experience, or follow the lead,of
of his own inclinations. Sleep at length overtook him before he had fettled the point, and, hard as his bed was, fatigue threw him into a profound repose, from which he started on the entrance of Father Joseph. " I come only to informl you," said he, " that you are expeEted by Father Ambrose, breakfast is- prepared for you, haften therefore to attend him."," How !" cried Ferdinand, do you leave me ? I thought to have had a further con* verfation. with you."," I am forbidden to indulge it,, and have received a reprimand for being so long in your room last night: I may just whisper you, that the paflions of mankind are the fame in all places, and in all situations; jea, lousy, envy, and avarice, prevails as much in monasteries as in palaces, they pervade in the moes profound retirements, and lead to the mooft despicable actions and sentiments, Adieu, may Heaven preserve you." Ending those words, he darted from the room, and left Ferdinand to follow.,On.
On entering the apartment he had quitted the preceding evening, he found Father Am- brose alone, refreshments before him, and having inquired of the other his name and rank in life, he began to launch forth in the praise of a monastic life, as the only asylum from trouble and pain; that abftraaed from the world, its hopes and fears, the holy Fa- thers fixed their thoughts on things above, where no cares or disappointments could attend their hopes or desires. He harangued so long, and Co eloquently on the subje6t, that, had not the advice of Father Joseph guarded his mind from the fascination of the piaure of contentment held to his view, it is more than probable that Ferdinand, under the im- pression of his present vexations, might have been induced to end his travels, and have fixed himself for life in that solitary man- sion; but already pre-possessed, the avenues to his heart were closed, and the eloquence of the Superior was exerted in vain: He heard him, however, with complaisance, but alledged absolute neceffty for his departure, as,ant
an excuse for not embracing that plan of life so calculated to insure happiness. He added, " that it was by no means improbable, but that he should return, and have the pleasure of vifiing the community for a longer time, if he might hope for admifion.",The zealous Father, eager to make a pro- fclyte of a young Nobleman, greatly ap- proved of his design, and assured him of a hearty welcome. Ferdinand felt half inclined to have mentioned Claudina, but not much pre-possessed in his favour, nor desirous of being then detained from visiting the solitary, who had permitted his return, he repressed the sentiment of confidence half rising to his lips, and rose to take leave, with grateful thanks for his hospitality. When conduced to the grate, he saw Father Joseph in com- pany with some others ; a general salute only passed between them, but their eyes spoke much cordiality towards each other.,CHAP.
CHAP. XII. ERDINAND now hastened to the Castle in the wood, and knowing the way, he pierced through its intricacies t]ht to a stranger seemed impassable, and in mrt h less time than he expeted was at the gat.s, He hastily pulled the bell, which, to his infi- nite vexation, broke off in his ha. d; for having been so long ufclefs, it h:;d been eaten out with rust, moved with difficulty the pre- ceding day, and now, by a second piul, snap- ped to pieces. Exceedingly difccncerted, he began .o apprehend that he shold gain no entrance; fortunately the iolitarv man,,who
who had expected him, being walking in the court, heard the faint found, which the jarring of the wires occasioned, and instantly appeared at the little wicket. Ferdinand was agreeably furpriftd at his sudden appearance. " You fee me returned (said he) anxious to culti- vate your acquaintance, and in your conver- fation blunt the keen edge of my own cala- nities.",:' Enter (said the solitary) I have expected vou, curiosity is so firongly implanted in the mind of man that I scarcely doubted of your return." They passed through the first court, and walked round the wall of the second to a finall pofic - door; on advancing towards. it, he added, " Having once permitted you a free entrance, my confidence shall not be a partial one." He then opened the door which led to a handtome colonade fronting the great gates that were boarded up, and excluded it from being seen in the outer court. They entered a large hall, round which run a gallery supported by pillars that led to the apartments above stairs; but the,6 painting
painting was almost effaced by the damp, the pillars entirely discoloured, some of them decayed and crumbling to pieces, threatening the dcfirution of the gallery they supported, and indeed the whole bore the appearance of total negleA. The solitary opened a door at the farther end of the hall, and conducted his gucft into what he called his library, for as such it seemed to have been intended ; but the glasses in many places were broken, the books all tumbling in disorder, and so covered with dust, that they were scarcely discernable. A few old-fafhioned velvet chairs, once of crimson, but changed by the damps, two tables, with a writing desk of a very parti- .cular old-fafhioned conftrution ; a large dog that lay before a great wood fire, and seemed by age rendered almost incapable of moving, though he growled at the Itranger; a sword, and a pair of pistols, that hung against the wall, comprised the whole furniture of this room.,Being feated, the solitary inquired of his success at the Convent. Ferdinand related,his
his reception there, and at the Friar's mo- naftery; adding, " You fee my wife will afford me no fort of satisfaCtion, and her message is as extraordinary and inexplicable as her whole conduct.",The old man sighed deeply: " I pity you, (said he) not for your present disappoint- nent, but because you are young, and must feel, poignantly feel, the flings of ingrati- tude, and the deftru&ion of those sanguine hopes of happiness you had figured to your- self in an union with the object of your choice, and who, I have little doubt of pro- nouncing, has proved unworthy of your at- tachment."," How! (exclaimed Ferdinand) do you believe my wife is criminal ?",:" Hath she not confessed as much ?" replied the other.",( Impossible !" said Ferdinand, ' lfe had no acquaintance, no man visited her, in my absence she resided with my brother, who lived very retiredi; impossible she could wrong, me.","Cease
" Cease to torment yourself with conjec- tures that cannot be elucidated; one day or. other be assured every thing will be ex- plained. - Yes (continued he, raising his voice) time and accident develops the darkest schemes, the machinations of the wicked will be detected, and, if to know the worst, your imagination can form, will afford any degree of ease, doubt not but that you will one day be satisfied; 'till then, try to repress your anxiety, and revere that command to extraor- dinarily delivered; try to forget that you have a wife existing, for Ihe has declared ' he is dead to you." Ending these words he stamped on the floor, and presently a man, old and feeble, entered the rcom.-" Bring some bread and wine."," Strange! (thought Ferdinand) this man said he was not the mailer, yet he seems to command; he drinks no wine himself, yet keeps it here, for whom then, when he lives thus solitary ? Or is there another person here who is the master ?",VOL. i. L The
The old servant returned with bread and wine and a cup; he looked very attentively on Ferdinand, and then withdrew. The Recluse, who penetrated through the silence of his guefi, laid, " I read your lurprife, and guess at the doubts which occupy your mind: I will satisfy them in part. I am not the owner of this once magnificent featy yet I am the master here, and have resided in it above htelve years. In a clear moon-light night I walk, sometimes to the skirts of the Black Forest, but at other times I never exceed the courts of the Castle, for the gardens are now a wilderness of weeds. Once a week the provisions I want are brought from a village about five miles off, on the edge of the so- reft. Wine is sometimes drawn here, though not by me, I have that within me which sup- ports my strength and spirits; my old atten- dant requires more substantial food. Bread, fruits and water, is all that my table affords, and as much as nature requires. I am not so old as you may suppose from my appear-,ance,
ance, only fifty-two, twelve of which I have past in the manner I tell you."," It would ill become me (said Ferdinand) to express a with to penetrate into the cause which has led you to this extraordinary fe- clufion from the world, though you mufft allow that it sufficiently warrants the most curious conjetures; but I will deserve the favour you have bestowed on me by my dif- cretion."," You are wife and prudent (replied the other) qualities not often attached to youth, and perhaps acquired by sorrow and experi- ence; on such terms you are welcome to remain here as long as you please.","May I be permitted to make one obfer- vation ?" asked Ferdinand.," Certainly, speak freely, the answer de- pends upon myself.","When I first came to your gate, you expressed it necessary to inquire if I could be admitted, now you confess yourself the maf- ter, and without society.",L 2 Your
" Your curiosity in this point is so very natural that I will satisfy it without reserve. The discovery of this mansion through the impenetrable, as I thought, woods, hills and vallies, so out of the common road, and even an object of terror to the few inhabitants that dwell on the other fide, the found of a bell, which had been silent for above nine years, and your appearance when I opened the wicket, altogether astonished me! Cal- lous, as I thought my heart was grown, it softened at the view of sorrow and weakness in so young a frame. To your request of admittance I said, ' I would inquire.' I came back, and consulted Francis; it was possible .you might be what you seemed, then there was no danger in permitting you to enter the outer court, but to guard against surprise, Francis secured the gate of the inner court, and was planted in a small room, within the huntsman's, where I led you, armed with that brace of pistols, which had you attacked me, or strove to force your way beyond the bounds,I
I allowed, he had orders to discharge, and instantly to dispatch you.",Ferdinand heard him with some degree of terror, and " Who, or what can this man be ?" darted naturally into his mind, and having taken bome refreshment, he began to confider whether it would be prudent to re- main in a place that seemed to be the abode of wretchedness, fear and difiruf. Curiosity however predominated, and as he aso was armed with a brace of piltols, he thought himself at least a match for two old men, Ihould they harbour any sinister designs against him." Having thus made up his mind, he began to remark on the conversations be- tween Father Joseph and himself, and the different language of Father Ambrose, the Superior. " Imuch fear (said he) that the former has been an unhappy victim, and feels no fatisfafion in his situation; for I can con- ceive that even a good mind well disposed towards religion and moral rectitude, if com- pelled to forsake the world, and lead an in- active life, contrary to the natural disposition,,L3 will
will grow languid in the performance of those duties, which free-will might have performed with pleasure and alacrity: For my own part, all my profpets of happiness for ever clouded, oppressed with the weight of a much-loved father's denunciation, and which seem-s to be so literally fulfilled in this life - a brother, a husband, a father; yet separated from every endearing tie; what can I pro- mise myself in this world, that can counter- balance that tranquil, that serene life which pervades in a convent, and which my misfor- tunes seem to point out as my only pl ace of reft; and if I can assure to myself such a companion, such a friend, as Father Joseph, what can I desire more ?",' Revenge !" cried the Solitary, with an eye darting fire through his emaciated count tenance: " Yes, revenge !" repeated he, with a violence that startled Ferdinand; " Live to detect the artful villany of those that have wronged you, and to punish them !"," But I know no such persons," said Ser- dinand " I know of no wrongs that I have,men
met with that require revenge. If my wife has been guilty, the is already puniihed; and for her accomplice, if such there be, he will not escape with impunity; and to drag on a wretched life, with the diabolical intention of destroying another, would be only redoubling my own miseries here, and assuring to myself punishment hereafter."," So young a stoic!" exclaimed the old man, with a look of contempt, " either you are a hypocrite, or you were born without passions."," The detestable character of the fir," replied the other, " I utterly disclaim, and had I been created without passions, all the misfortunes of my life would have been avoided : No, I am not without passions, but adversity has taught me wisdom, has mode- rated the impetuosity of youth, and suffering as I do under the violence of momentary rage, which in an instant may be guilty of excesses never to be repaired, I have learned to bear and toforbear in points that are doubt-,L 4 ful,
fll, and where my courage and honour are not cueltiontd."," You are a philosopher, Sir," answered the Solitary, apparently much agitated, " and fitter for the convent, perhaps, than the world, since you can so easily, so tamely, wait for time to elucidate your injuries; but I beg pardon, it cannot concern me; persons born with different sentiments will at dif- ferently, and as in this point we do not agree, we will change the fubjeEt.",He did so, and Ferdinand found him learned, intelligent, and communicative, yet on every fubjeet he discoursed with a vehe- mence so little to be expected from the fee- blenefs of his looks and manner when he first appeared at the wicket, discovered a temper so violent and so decided, that his manners rather repulsed than conciliated any growing esteem, and seemed to promise that little plea- sure could be derived from cultivating his acquaintance. After some hours conversation ·the Solitary took him up to the gallery,which .was extensive, and had pnce been magnificent.,He
He opened the doors of several apartments; that overlooked the gardens, and an extent of country; but the former was a confused mass of trees, shrubs and weeds, and the country beyond appeared an immense forest.,This was certainly an unpleasant situation to build a superb house on, observed Ferdi- nand. Our Castle is on a rocky ground, and adjoining to hills and mountains; but they are cultivated and inhabited: Here every thing has- the appearance of a desert. Is there no town or village near, for I profess myself entirely unacquainted with this part of the country, from always thinking the woods both dangerous and impenetrable.?-, " There is a village a few miles distant, but I know not its name," was all the answer. - He then carried him across the gallery to another wing of the building, and.opening, a door, " Here you may sleep if you please;. Francis can find linen for the bed, and shall light a fire, though poflibly the chimney may not draw." This room had been handsomely urnifhed,. but.it was in a very decayed state,,-. -L 5 and.
and the whole appearance was so cold and comfortless, that Ferdinand hesitated a mo- ment whether he should accept the offer, and sleep there or not; but the day was shut- ting in, and he might even lose his way to the monastery, he thought he-could be in no hazard ofdanger, and therefore it would be most. prudent to pass that night there, tho' he felt no inclination to prolong his stay, especially as he could hope for no gratification to his cu- riofity, for the Solitary's heart seemed locked up and carefully guarded. Returning to the. lower room they spent the evening together in conversation on various fubjets. Ferdi- nand was pleased with the strong understand- ing and knowledge of the world which the other displayed; but he observed,. on several. occasions, that he was decided and peremp- tory in his opinions, and that he evaded every thing tending to his own situation, and gave not a single instance of that confidence he had at first led his guest to hope for.,At ten o'clock Francis appeared with a lamp, the Gentlemen wiflhed each other a,good
good night, Francis was ordered to attend the firanger to the door of his apartment, and then return to his master. Ferdinand judged this order was to preclude any conversation between him and the old man, and therefore he vias silent; but as they parted at the door he thought Francis suppressed a rising sigh, and looking at him saw his face was clouded by a heavy expression of grief. He bowed, retired, and pulled the door after him. A cheerful fire was blazing in the chimney, and examining the door of his apartment, he perceived there was a lock and two strong bolts; these he secured, and having placed the lamp on the table, he threw off his clothes, .and got into bed.,Here he lay some time revolving all past circumstances, and. confidering which road he should pursue in the morning, when fud- denly he conceived that he heard, some faint shrieks as if.at a great distance, he sprung up in. the bed and listened; he heard no more, all was a dead silence; yet fill he could not be persuaded but that he heard the cries: -,L6 He
He lay some hours in a kind of fearful ex-. peaation of, he knew not what. No fort of noise however invaded his ears, and at length he dropped asleep, from which he was awa- kened by a voice at the door, telling him breakfast was ready.. He was soon dreted,, and found the Solitary waiting for him, coffee on the table: - " Did you sleep well?" de- manded he.," Perfectly well," replied Ferdinand, fud- denly determined not to mention the cries;. "indeed my bed was so very superior to what I have had those last two nights, that no wonder I indulged myself so long this morning."," You are welcome to use the bed as. long as you like," was all the reply. The day became gloomy, and in a short time the, snow fell in great quantities; this the Gen- tleman of the houle observed, faying,.: "you are now weather-bound, and must amuse:: yourself as well as you can.",Ferdinand
·*Ferdinand found among the books the works of many excellent authors, and there- fore was at no loss to beguile the time, and indeed had reason to be thankful for his situ- ation, as before night the snow was at least two feet deep on the ground. About the time of retiring the snow ceased, the moon broke through. the clouds, and a cold, sharp wind arose denoting a severe frost. When he came into his apartment, the refletion of that resplendent orb induced him to go to the window, and he fat down by it for some time admiring the appearance of the trees and underwood, which being covered with the snow, exhibited a hundred fantastic ihapes to engage the attention..,Loft in the recollection of past events, he fat a. long time without thinking of the hour, until suddenly the fame faint Ihrieks broke upon his ear, that he had heard the preceding night.. He farted up, and opened the win- dow, the voice ceased; he liftened.attentively a long time, it was no more repeated. Con- vinced, however, that it was no illusion, o
a diordered imagination, he began to. confider from whom, or- from whence it could pro- ceed. The founds both nights were exatly similar, and he concluded muff issue from some person distressed and confined. "There is some unaccountable mystery hangs about this forlorn place, and the. Solitary who in- habits it dares not trust me with. the secret: I will avail myself of his permission, and stay: here a few. days to fee. if I can, penetrate through it.",Thus thought Ferdinand when he.retired to bed; he slept undisturbed, and when he appeared below,.the firit question asked him was, "- If he slept quiet ?"," Entirely so," answered he; " this place is remote from all dis'turbance, and is calcu-. lated forthe Court of Somnus by its stillness.",The Solitary seemed pleased, and observed,, " That the. depth of the snow must preclude him from an attempt at travelling in. that obscure and unfrequented part of the coun- try." The other raised no objetions.to re- maining another day, and both were.much,entertained
entertained, by a mutual. communication of.. observations that seemed greatly. to relax the. unbending features ofthe solitary man;.but yet. he preserved a profound filnee relative. to his. own concerns.. Eruit,.eggs and fallad,.were. their only.refrefhments, with which Ferdinand was.perfetly content.,When night came, and Ferdinand.retired: to his apartment, he met Francis on the stairs. The old man flopped;" Areyou. going to live here, Sir ?" asked he.," For.a few days only," replied the other.. "I am sorry for it," said the, old man. - God knows we want company.",c I think so," answered Ferdinand, ." for- your master muff have. a.. horrid time.of it here.","Horrid indeed ! . You knowrall.then, Sir." "No, indeed, I know nothing;. your master keeps his, own secrets, .and I do not presume to be inquisitive, though certainly every circumflance about this mansion and its master muft-raife.itrange conjecures, and inspire. curiosity." The.voice of the Solitary.,calling
calling Francis, obliged the old man to haften, away, though by his earnest look and the motion of his lips he appeared about to fay something interesting. Ferdinand was vexed at the interruption, and retired to his apart- ment, not to sleep, but fixed himself again to the window, that he might more diftinftly hear the cries, should they be again repeated.,The more he refleced on this man's con-: verfation and behaviour, the more extraor- dinary and inconsistent it appeared. On their, first interview there seemed more of melan- eholy than ferocity in his manners, and he had blamed the late Count for his rafhnefsi He had given traits of sensibility and huma- nity; yet in a late conversation he had advised revenge, and seemed animated by rage to a degree of fury in his looks. He had said; on his entering the Castle a second time, "that his confidence should not be a partial one ;"! yet his secrets were more guarded than ever, nor was there any probability that he would be nore communicative.,.. . I
'" I thought," said Ferdinand, mentally, " that if admitted to this house I could be content to remain here and spend my days in solitude, I supposed this mansion might be an asylum for the unfortunate, orthe abode of undeserved misery, driven from a faithless :world; but I fear there is more of guilt than suffering in this man; for affliction makes people plaintive, and if the mind isfree from guilt, it naturally expands and grows com- municative to a fellow fuffere. I know not what to conclude upon, more than a refolu; tion not to make this my refting-place, should J be invited to do so, which seems not very likely to happen; yet 1 ihould be loth to dew. part without being better informed of the rmyftery that pervades here.",He fat ruminating on the occurrences that had befallen him some time, when again his ears were assailed by the fame cries, though rather fainter, and being on the watch to catch the found, he was convinced that it proceeded from the other fide of the build- ing, and from some place where the found,was
was suppressed. Excessively agitated, he be- gan to confider in what manner there. was a possibility of being satisfied, or of obtaining a solution of this unaccountable business. - He had every. ebil to apprehend from the resentment of. the. Solitary, should he be dif- covered in prying into h s.fecrets, and yet to know some person was regularly ill-treated,. which seemed to be the cafe, and to be in, capable of aflifting that person, or to leave the Castle without.receiving any explanation, was what.both his humanity and curiosity re- .oked against. In the lay he, was never alone, or if. alone, always in view of the Solitary; nor had he ever an opportunity of speaking to Francis, his master. carefully watched him; it appeared impossible- therefore to penetrate into this. mystery, unless he could by any finesse elude. his vigilance, and have an opportunity to rmble about the mansion alone,,CHAP,
C HA P. XIII. IN forming and reje&ting a thousand plans,to gratify his curiosity Ferdinand pafled the night, and obtained but a very few hours. seep in the morning, though they were none of them early risers. His looks unrefrefhed, were observed by his entertainer, who asked him, "-If he had not refted well ?"," No," replied Ferdinand," I did not." " Did any thing particular disturb you ?" " No, only my own uneasy thoughts; you will allow I have sufficient vexations,which, if refleead on, must. ometimes preclude reft.',tt At;
" At your time of life," answered the other, " the acivity of the mind cannot be confined by particular circumstances, or local situations. Retirement will not do for you; travelling will amuse the eye, and give a diversity to your. ideas; variety is absolutely necefiary to keep the mind alive, and pre- vent it from dwelling on such circumstances as might, if indulged, overwhelm it with despair, and stagnate the senses: The snow growing firm will be no impediment to your travelling, and for the cold, a soldier should be accustomed to bear it."," I am not apprehensive of fatigue,, or in- capable of bearing cold," answered Ferdi- nand; " but perfetly a stranger to this fide of the country, there would be fome-danger of losing my way, as there are no trass in the snow to guide me: I think, however, that if the weather continues fair, I will pur- sue my ramble to-morrow, if you will allow me to partake of your hospitality another day" ","Certainly,"
-" Certainly," i-cturned the other; " but I think your scheme a very desultory and un- satisfactory one. As you are now acquainted with the residence of your wife, and her de- termination to fee you no more, what is it you purlue ? Why not return, and pass your winter at the Castle, look after your son, if you think him/fich, and prepare yourself for returning in the spring to the army ?"," The mansion of my brother is hateful to me on many accounts," replied Ferdinand, " it would continually remind me of every misfortune: No, there I cannot reside; and to live near my boy, for mine 1 amJ ure he is, could be no benefit to him, and having placed him in the hands of integrity, I am entirely easy on that head. I once thought that retirement would make me at least re- signed; but I am now of your opinion, that a diversity of objects is more likely to amuse my mind, and that, where peace and con- tentment are for ever fled to procure a chance of temporary ease, variety of places and ob- jets are absolutely necessary; yet will you,pardon
pardon me for observing, that either your advice proceeds from a conviction that you have yourfelfchofen wrong in devoting your. self to solitude, or that you are weary of my company."," You conclude wrong in the first in- stance," answered he: " I have never re- pented my residence here, on the contrary, it is the only circumstance that enables me to support the burthen of existence; on the other point I will not deceive you; I long since thought every pafion, every feeling, but one, was annihilated in my bosom. - Your appearance, your voice and manner, was unexpeced, was touching; a few dor- mant embers of sensibility procured you en- trance at first, and a particular consideration, in which I have been disappointed, induced me to receive you a second time. I now feel that I have been too long secluded from the world to find any fatisfa&ion in a com- panion, and therefore I frankly confess I do not solicit your stay here. In the advice I have given you I am governed rather by,what 6
·what I think more agreeable ;to your own feelings than mine, for we differ on particular fubjeds, and i, in your cafe, should act otherwise than you *do: But - I have no *more to fay. You may stay a week, or depart to-morrow consult your own con- venience, and do as you please." He left the room as he ended there words, without waiting for an answer.,Ferdinand flood some moments in astonish. ment; he would have given the world to have known who this extraordinary man was, and to have penetrated into the mystery that enveloped him; but he saw no profpet of gaining the mnalleft intelligence to gratify his curiosity by remaining there, and after the civil dismission he had received, he could feel no inclination to a longer refidence-being left alone, a thing not usual since he had been in the house; he went into the next apart- ment, which had a door opening into, what had once been a very fpaciouL garden, though how entirely overgrown with weeds; a very narrow path-way, where they seemed to be,trodden s
trodden down but not cleared, went by the fide of the building, close under the windows, and here he walked on, observing the dread- ful ruinous tfate the rooms were in, the glass broken, the floors had been long entirely exposed to the weather, and bore every mark of decay and desolation.,He proceeded till he came to the other wing, and immediately recolleded that the feeble cries he had heard seemed to have issued from thence. He walked slowly round, and elevating his voice, " What cruel neglec has this once noble mansion endured: Surely whoever is, or was the master of it, must have met with uncommon misfortunes; and to what a wretched state must that mind be brought that can support existence in this desolated place." He had scarcely pronoun- ced those last words, when he heard a heavy groan and an articulate voice, which appeared to be at no great distance from him. He flopped: " Did I not hear a voice ?" said he aloud.,The
"The voice of misery !" was the answer, in a feeble voice, that founded as if underneath him.," Whoever you are, speak; I am a friend, can I come to you ?","' I fear not," was the reply, and at the fame moment Ferdinand observed Francis at the Iteps of the glass doors, as if looking for him. " I am called," said he, fuftly, " what hour of the night is safe ?" '" Not till after twelve," repeated the fame voice, with a kind of groan. - Ferdinand turned Ihort round, and met Francis advancing as quick as his feeble frame would permit.,Oh! Sir, make haste, pray make hate." "What is the matter?" demanded the other.," My master, Sir, O ! pray make haste." He turned back quickly, Ferdinand fol- lowing him, and being more nimble got before, and run mechanically to the library, where lay extended on the floor the Solitary, apparently insensible. On advancing towards him, he perceived one fide of his face dif-,VOL. I. M torted
torted; he fixed his eyes on Ferdinand, and attempted to speak, but his words were in- articulate, and gave evident marks of a para- lytic affetion. On the entrance of Francis they attempted to raise him; but succeeded with infinite difficulty, as he had received a partial stroke which entirely disabled one fide; with much trouble they got him upon the bed, and not knowing what else to do, they poured some wine down his throat, though he strove with one hand to prevent it.,"What can be done ?" cried Ferdinand; " Is there any help to be procured ?",, I know of none." answered Francis: " I am unable to get to the village." Before the other could reply, a fort of convulsive motion seized on the unhappy man, and in a few moments he was no more !,-" 0, good Lord !" exclaimed Francis, " he is gone, he is dead, and all his cruel- ties unrepented of!",( He is indeed no more !" said Ferdinand, truck with horror at the fuddenevent, " and may Heaven have mercy on him, whatever,may
may have been his errors. Follow me down stairs," added he to the old man, who appeared to be planet struck, I with to talk with you." They each took a glass of wine, and then looking ftedfaftly on Francis,' "Tell me," said he, "who is confined 'in this Castle, whose cries are those I have nightly heard ?"," How, Sir !" cried the other, " haveyoa heard their cries ? Who, or what they ale, I know not, nor their place of confinement; but that there are some poor fouls some where underground is sure enough.'," What," said Ferdinand, "' were not you in your master's secrets ? Have you not le- fided with him many years ?"," I have lived with him nine years, Sir; but I never knew his secrets, for he never converted with me more than to aik for wl a: he wanted, nor ever sent me out of tih Castle. Whenever the man, who brings things from the village twice a week, rings at the bell, he always went himself, and so, Sir, I could speak to nobody.",M 2 " low
( How came you to be with him ?" asked Ferdinand.," Why, Sir, it is now better than nine years ago since I had been reduced by sick- ness and the rheumatism, to be unable to work for my bread, and lived by the charity of the village, which was little enough ; so one day a farmer, who now and th-n gave me milk, said to me, Francis, if you would like to have a good bed, plenty of milk and eggs, and neither labour or trouble, I can get it for you; so, Sir, my heart leaped for joy, for many a day I had nothing, be- cause my rheumatism would not let me walk; so I said, I should be heartily obliged to him. He then told me the Gentleman in the Caftre, whom we had often heard of, and all the village was afeared to come near the place; so he said, this Gentleman wanted an old man to be with him, whom he would treat kindly, if he could bear confinement. At first, Sir, I was dahred, and much afeared; but the farmer said he was a very quiet good fort of a Gentleman, and I might live very,comfortable;
comfortable; so I thought again he could mean no harm to such a poor fellow as me, and besides, if I didn't like him, I could come away with the farmer again-but there I was out of my reckoning; so, Sir, per- fuaded, at last I ventured to come to the gates on the other fide the house towards the village; so when the farmer told him, he opened the gate and let me in: God help me, I little thought I should not go out again; and so, Sir, to be sure he always be- haved kindly to me, but it was so lonesome that I grew tired; but what could I do ? every time the farmer came he went with me to the wicket. Once I did venture to fay, I would rather go back; so fays he, what have you to complain of? So I said 'twas so cruel dull. 0, said the farmer, if that's all, Francis, an old man (like you) may be glad to be quiet, you can want nothing with the world; and ob, Sir, I saw plain enough he was glad to be rid of me, and, as I thought I might not live long, and to be sure had,M 3 good
good usage, I refted quiet, and have been here ever since."," Well," said Ferdinand, a little impa- tiently, "but what do you know of the persons confined ?",Nothing, Sir, but this: One day, after I had been here about a month, I walked down where you was this morning, and I thought I heard some groans, so deadly as- frighted I hafted back, and told my master.- Ah! (said he) don't go that way again, Francis, I have heared the fame noise some- times; but 'tis no where else to be heard, so don't go again.",(' I said no, I would take care of that; but I was terribly scared, because I believed it was ghosts, and I could not sleep all night, and in the middle of the night I thought I heared some cries, so, Lord help me, I was in a terrible fright but taking courage I got out of bed to go towards master's roomn,. t'other fide of the gallery, when, just as I opened the door very softly, I saw master go into his room, with a lamp in his hand, and a,little
little whip and a basket, which I had always seen on a shelf, in t'other hand; so he went in and shut the door without feeing me, being in the dark.: I thought it was cruel strange, so next day I looks in the balket, and feed crumbs of bread, so then I looked at the loaf, and some of it was gone. Well, Sir I said nothing, but I made a hole on one fide of my chamber door, and when I went to bed I marked the loaf; so instead ofgoing in to bed I watched at the hole, and at mid- night I saw him come out with the fame things in his hands, and go down flairs, and after a little time I heared the fame cries. - Lord ! how I was afrightened; so after a time back he came, and next morning I looked at the loaf-a good piece was gone; so when I.carried it in to breakfast, I said I believes the saries or ghosts eat our bread, for I. am sure it goes faster than we eat it. That's nothing to you, said he, with such a terrible look as made me shake again ;- you don't pay for it, and no matter which way it goes i so, Sir, from that day I said no more,,M4- I
I was for a good while always afeared, but at last, as I may fay, I grew used to it, and so I was content as well as I could.,' When he camed and told me your honour was at t'other wicket, and made me faflen the outer gate, and ordered me into t'other room to shoot you, if you forced your way farther. Dear me, what a fright I was in, the pistol was of no use to me, and when you came again my heart rejoiced, in the hope that you was going to live with us; but after the first day master told me you muf go again, which made me cruel for- rowful, and this, Sir, is all I know.",Ferdinand, heartily tired of this prolix account began to confider how he could find the way to this unhappy person, or persons, who were confined. He returned to the room where the deceased lay, and searching his pockets found only one crown and a key, which key Francis said belonged to the library bookcase, where he kept all the keys of the Castle; they again descended to the library, and opening the desk saw a bunch of keys,,which
which for the present was all he fought for. They went towards the other' wing through a long gallery, which terminated with a large door; here they tried their keys, and at length found the right; on opening it a dark staircase was before them; they now con- cluded a light would be necessary, and Francis was sent back to procure one.,On his return with a lamp, they descended the stairs into a long vaulted passage. On bne fide were three rooms that had once been inhabited as domestic offices; they proceeded dntil their progress was impeded by an iron door: Here also they tried their' keys,. and 6pened it, there was' another descent of'a fewtteps, and the bottorii feemned'a:'damp, cold dungeon.- Ferdihand flopped, and speaking aloud; "Is therel any person. con- fined in this' place ?" '. .,'A faint voice replied,' -Yes, two wvretched beings !" The found appeared to be near thefn,' but fti1 deeper; they moved : little ofinward, and perceived' another door, 'with two strong bolts drawn across; thefe'were,:' ' ~ M 5 easily
easily. removed, and another descent of three fleps brought them to a vaulted room, but cautious in advancing, for their lamp emitted but a very faint glimmer.--" Is this your prison, are we right ?" aked Ferdinand.," Yes' answered a voice, so close to him that he started, and .extending the light per- ceived a figure that made him shudder, and Francis scream with terror.,It had the appearance of a, man,. from an immense long beard that reached almost to his knees as he fat upon a bench, with a fmalt table before him, on which was a. wooden plate, and a little wooden bafon: He had a blanket wrapped round him, and his. hair. co- vered his thoulders down to the bottom of his. back; his features they could make nothing: of, but his eyes, from the meagre counte- nance, looked funk, yet wild-, they now per- ceived a glimmeringJamp was sarsened. against the wall on one fide.,"( Gracious Heaven!" exclaimed Ferdi- nand, "can a human being have existed here ?" .,( "Yes,"
(C Yes," replied the poor wretch; "many years I have struggled with life, but wonder: not at me, look yonder;" he pointed to the other fide, where on advancing they per- ceived another iron door, and a little on one. fide a small opening in it, through which: another human face was visible, but more emaciated than the other.-" Have we a key, for this door ?" cried Ferdinand, inexpressibly, shocked.," That door," answered the man, "is seldom opened, in fa& none of their keys were large enough.",." O," said Francis, " I recollect a large heavy key. hangs on one. fide of the-chimney piece,." , -," Will you venture to fetch it, or will you, remain here whilst I. go back ?" asked Ser- dinand,,"C O Lord, Sir, I'll fetch it; stay here i!' repeated he, looking fearfully round the place, and at the, shocking figure before him,, "No, no, I'll make what haste I can." He took the lamp and hastened off. The faint.,M6. one.
one that glimmered against the wall served only to make "darkness visible," and to -throw additional horrors on the place. - "c Good Heaven!" cried Ferdinand, is it possible human nature could support a long confinement in this place !"," Ah! Sir," replied the man, feebly, " we know- not till put to the test what very ievere trials nature can sustain. Death is not so ready to relieve the wretched. Our cruel persecutor found out a way to make us sup- port, nay 'even wilh for life. That dear, unhappy woman! think what must have been her sufferings; upwards of twelve years, as the avenging monster told us a few days since, have we been here. Long, long ago, we loft all power of computing time. 0, Eugenia, shall I live to fee you free! - To be spared the misery of feeing you die," answered a faint but sweet voice, " is all the boon I afkof' Heaven !",Mutual sighs succeeded this tender expref- sion, and Ferdinand, overcome with emotions at a scene so replete with horror, could not,suppress
suppress audible proofs of his sensibility. - " O !" cried the wretched man, " how pier- cing, how inexpressibly sweet, to the heart, is the voice of companion! Heaven only knows how you obtained entrance here; but should that cruel monster discover you?-"," Fear not," said Ferdinand, hastily, " he is no more; death has flopped his career of wickedness at last.",The man was about to reply, when Francis entered with the key, for 'so firongly was his mind impressed with terror, that, though he dared not flay in the vault, he was almost equally afraid to go back, and return alone. Much quicker than he had attempted to move for many years did he exert himself on his errand, and heartily rejoiced to find he was once more safe by the fide of Ferdinand, who eagerly snatching the key unlocked'the other iron door, and entered a dungeon still more frightful, with only a few rays of light that served not even to diftinguilh objecs, and proceeded from a small iron grating at,the
the very top of the vault, which grating was almost covered by rust and weeds.,His own lamp guided him to the woman,, for such he found she was,, her hair almost covering her whole figure: She was also feated on a bench with a table, plate and bafon, similar to the man's, a blanket round her also.-" For Heaven's fake !" exclaimed, he, " let us remove you from this wretched place."," I know not," said she, feebly, " how it can be done-we are chained.",, Chained !" "Yes, each hand and foot is chained to- gether, so as not to prevent our moving; but the Count will shew you."," The Count !" cried Ferdinand, returning. again to the man, who opening the. blanket, the other saw a flout chain was fastened to each leg, which went round the opposite arm, not preventing the movement,. but yet con- fined them so as to preclude any exertions, by pulling them cross ways when they at- tempted to walk.,- " Is
" Is there no way of getting off those chains ?" said Ferdinandr," Only by a key or a file," answered the- man.," Have patience, my good friends," re- turned Ferdinand; " I will return, and seek for something that may answer the purpose.","Yes," added Francis, darting out firft,y. left he should be asked to stay there, " we will find something I warrant you.",Notwithstanding the extreme agitation of Ferdinand's mind, he could not choose, but- observe the great alacrity with which. Francis. hastened his steps. WYhen they had reached. thelibrary, they 'earched abouj.or a file;. nothing of that kind was to be seen, but they found two odd contruefed keys, which they- supposed might belong to the chains; having, recruited the fire with wood,. taking a. bottle of wine,, their keys, and two or three old. knives, they soon returned:to the wretched prisoners, and to their greatjoy found they could. relieve them from their chains. Ser- dinand supported the woman into the next,dungeon, i;~~~
dungeon, they ruffed into each. other's arms, and fell to the ground; With the affitance of Francis they were lifted up: Ferdinand prevailed on them to take some wine. ',We are not strangers. to this liquor," said the man, gratefully pressing the hand of his preserver; once a week we have had' a half-pint each of us, not as a favour, but with a degree of refined cruelty, to support and enable us to bear the miseries infli'ted on us."`,Without shoes,. only coarse fiannel flock- ings, a kind of petticoat of the fame, and the blanket round their' fioulders,. they .haid only been accustomed to. 'Rruggle ratlierthah walk to the end of their du'ngeonis,: w;hre a small partition was contrived to 'aObrd pro-' per separation from the place they-were to- fit and lye on, for beds they had none.' 'With' infinite difficulty Ferdinarid'and' Francis got them out of the dungeon,. and up the fieps into the vaulted paiTage-: Here they 'reted' for some time, and 't length reached'itster-.' mination; but no sooner did' the ight aind,air.
air dart upon them, than the woman fainted, and the man was almoff blinded. By proper applications they recovered the Lady, and Francis, by shutting some of the windows, rendered the light less offensive; yet so ex- tremely feeble were the unhappy prisoners, that it was a considerable time before their deliverers could 'get them into the library, where placed in two old easy chairs at some distance from the fire, that it might not ope- rate too powerfully upon them, and being refreshed with a little bread and wine, their spirits began to return, and the Lady burst into a torrent of tears, that flowed for some tine with such violence as frightened Ferdi- nand ; but the man thanked Heaven for the relief. " Be not uneasy, Sir," said lie, " not one tear has fallen from those eyes for years; I thought those sources of relief to the over- charged mind were entirely dried up; the indulgence will, I trut, be attended with happy effe&s.",Indeed it proved so, for after the firif tur- bulence was abated, she recovered sufficiently,to
to thank her deliverer in the warmest terms. Ferdinand proposed her retiring to bed, the one he had slept in Francis had prepared for her he lamented the impossibility of pro- curing her linen and necefiaries for the pre- sent.," It is not impossible," said the Gentleman suddenly, " but that our trunks and clothes are till here, though perhaps decayed by time.",I'll be hanged," cried Francis," if those trunks, in a room next to this Gentleman's, ben't the very ones, for there they have been locked-up ever since I camed here.",On this hint Ferdinand rallied forth with his bunch of keys. to the room. mentioned, where the trunks were deposited, and after. trying several keys to no purpose, Francis was dispatched for an instrument of some kind to break them open, which with much diffi- culty they at last effeced,. and found them full of clothes and linen for both,fexes; also some childrens necelfaries, which last rather. fiurprifed Ferdinand; they however fele&ed;,some
rome for both persons, which seemed less injured by time than might have been ex- pected; these were carried down, and when aired, the Lady was helped to her apart- ment, and linen left for her, which, from the fliffnefs of her arms and general debility of her limbs, {he was a considerable time before she could put on; and when covered, and she was laid down, the sudden transition from such extreme misery to hope and com- fort, asseted her so forcibly as to preclude fieep for many hours: At length, however, she fell into a refreshing slumber; such as she had very long been a stranger to.,Mean time Francis had prepared his bed for the Gentleplan, for though there were many other beds in the house, it was thought improper to put him into a room without sirs airing it. Being accommodated with com- sortable linen, he very readily accepted their rfliance to retire ; ad, after having seen lim into-bed, Ferdinand and Francis returned to the library to talk over this extraordinary,affair,.
affair, which afforded much room for obfer- vaticn and conje&ure.," Lord have mercy onus !" cried Francis, " how could they two poor fouls live so for twelve years, naked and starving ? 0, dear me, I used to think my lot hard, but to be sure, Sir- it was Paradise to what they had. What a shame for me to think of trouble !"," True, Francis," replied Ferdinand, "if we could, when afflicted, but examine into many circumstances that tend to lighten our own calamities, and compare them with the more painful disadvantages which others la- bour under, we should learn patience and resignation under the evils we buffer; but the human mind is too apt to view their own situation, and that of others under the medium of error, make partial comparisons, and draw unjust conclusions to increale their own misery.," It appears to me that the Gentleman and Lady are the owners of this Castle, and had their persecutor died before I came here,. doubtless they must have been starved in that,horrid
horrid dungeon, for it is iiot likely you would have discovered them."," Me, Sir! 0, no, I flould' have crept out of the Castle as fast as I could if he had died when I was alone with him, though the Lord knows how I fhcli.d have managed, for I could not walk to the village I am lure, and he might have died many days before our market man came, and I fhotild never have been able to flay in this place with a dead corpse by myself. - So Provi- dence sent you here, Sir, to save them poor fouls fiom fiarvation, and me fiom dying of fear or fatigue," During this time Ser- dinand had opened the bookcase to replace the keys, and curiosity induced him to search if there were any papers or memorandums relative to the deceased. Opening one drawer he met with a manuscript, the pages being open as if lately written, his eye caught the words: The firanger, who calls himself Ferdinand.'-(" Ah !" exclaimed he, " this is doubtless a kind of journal, and may develop the whole myifery." Turning to the back,,he
he saw it was entitled, Memoirs of the Baron S*****.' The writing was extremely bad, and many pages seemed hardly legible, evidently written with a weak and trembling hand. He ordered Francis to make a fire in another apartment, air more linen, and get refrelhments for the Lady and Gentleman against they ihould awake; then kindling a frefl blaze for himself, he prepared with eager curiosity to peruse the manuscript be- fore him, which contained the following Narrative.,CHAP.
CHAP. XIV. MEMOIRS OF BARON s*****. " SHOULD these Memoirs ever fall into,the hands of an intelligent being, let him mark the instability of expe&ted happi- ness; let him learn to detest the fascinating charms of false, deceitful woman, and to be- ware of the insidious arts, the treacherous designs of base, perfidious man; let fufpi- cion mark his eye, and caution guide his judgment; let him Ihun the syren woman, turn his ears from the delusive voice of plea-,...s * fore,
sure, and lock his bosom close from pro- fetilons of fi-iendfhip, which tend only to deceive, and under a specious covering en- velop tie most treacherous designs. Should those cautions be read too late to preserve him from the machinations of the deceitful heart, then let him learn from-me the triumph of Re-venge! ! !"," My father was a Bavarian Baron, but supporting his rank with that splendour ne- ceffary to keep his vassals in awe, and give consequence to his dignity at Court,' he dimi- niihed the value of those estates bequeathed to him by his ancestors, and left me poiffled of equal pride, ambition, and desire of gran- deur and magnificence, without a capability of gratifying either. Unable to appear at Court with the consequence attached to-my title, I retired to my estate, and fought, in the submissive obedience of my vassals, and in the authorative and fullen grandeur I as- fumed over them, a consolation for that retirement-difappointed ambition had driven me :to choo^, as a imaller evil than sup-,porting
porting the arrogance of riches, where there could be no superiority of birth to my own. Five years I dragged on an inactive life with- out enjoying any advantages from my feclu- lion, but what arofc from lording it over my tenantry, without knowing the blessings of fQciery, for there wvle none I deigned to con- verse with. In a kind' of gloomy magnifi- cence that was confined to my own estate, which inspired awe, but which repressed love or reverence, I pafied my days in riding over the fame track of ground which had no va- riety, and my nights in constant regrets for the loss of that consequence I was born to. aflume, but which the prodigality of my ancestors had compelled me to resign.,"One day, attended by several of my vassals, I was riding round the skirts of a wood which bounded my estate, when I was suddenly alarmed by quick and repeated shrieks that seemed to issue from the wood: I instantly rode to the fide from whence the voice proceeded, and in a few moments per- ceived a carriage surrounded by four or five,VOL. I. N banditti,
banditti, and two horsemen laying dead in the road. The appearance of myself and servants, who speeded towards them, caused the villains to desist, and provide for their own safety. It was in vain to attempt pur- suing them, as through the closeness of the wood they might elude' our observation, I therefore hastened to the carriage where a young Lady fat, who had thrown herself upon the bosom of a -man to all appearance dead or dying. When (he raised her head, never shall I forget the moment that de- cided my future destiny, and ruined my peace for ever ! When she tIrned her eyes upon me, Heavens ! what were my sensa- tions! until that lucklle's hour a ftrangcr to the captivating charms of beauty, a blaze of charms dressed in the fascination of tears and sorrow, and which conveyed a thousand tender ideas to a susceptible heart: She held out one of her lovely hands, ' Save him, 0, save my father!' she cried in a voice of softest melody, 'or pierce my bosom also !'- 0, the remembrance of that moment of,delight,
delighlt, pregnant with years of ceaseless misery! 0, beautiful, false, enchanting, de- ftrutive charmer! Woman, vile abandoned woman! but I will be calm, am I not re- venged? Yes, and that exquisite fatisfaetion lhall attend me to my grave !",Let me proceed: " Under a delirium of sudden rapture I exerted myself with un- common alacrity, having prevailed on her to quit the chaise, I entered it, and found the Gentleman had received a wound in his breast, whether dangerous or not I could not know, I perceived he still lived, and having sent off a fcrvant to procure the attendance of a surgeon, I entreated the Lady to go on to my Castle in the carriage, whilst my vassals formed a kind of litter, to carry the wounded man much easier than the motion of the wheels would admit of. She acquiesced in every request with the warmest expreflions of gratitude for my attention to her parent; every tender look, every gentle word, twined itself about my heart, and confirmed me a wretch for ever!,N 2 cc We
" We arrived at my Castle, the surgeon soon made his appearance, and, after exa, mining the wound, gave us hopes that it would not prove mortal. The Gentleman did not recover his senses until the pain, which the probing of the wound occasioned, routed him from the insensibility that had overpowered his faculties, and enabled him to dii'cover his daughter kneeling at the fide of the bed, and bathing his hand with her tears. MIy child! he exclaimed-Gracious ieaven, I thank thee, my child is safe !"- lIe \vas desired not to speak, and after some inarticulate blessings on his deliverer, weak- ness crmprelled him to give over the attempt.,The two servants that lay in the wood vbhen I first discovered the carriage, we found to be entirely deprived of life,, and the pof-boy had fled thro' the trees: I knew not therefore the names or quality of my guests, but every thing in their appearance and man- rers teemed to denote that they were of no contemlpr.t le rank. During three days, I :wv the young Lady only at the bed-side of,her
her father; but in that time the subtle poison ,stole into my heart, and love, the mdft ardent and most impetuous, took polffiGon of my whole foul, and engrossed every faculty of my mind. On the fourth day, the old Gentleman was declared to be out of danger, and allowed the privilege of speaking. IHe desired to fee me ; when I attended him his gratitude was boundles ; he called me the preserver of his life, and the guardian-angel of his Eugenia.,He told me that he was a Nobleman of Suabia, his name Count Zimchaw. Having been on a visit to a relation at Munich, he was returning to Suabia through Mindelhiem, that he might call on another friend. Coming thro' the wood, which he took as the nearest route, he was attacked hy four men. His ser- vants, as well as himself, having fire arms, pre- pared to relifr them; but his faithfulattendants were shot dead, and the carriage surrounded. Findingthen thatrefifancecould have no avail, he was in the aEd of resigning his pistol, after having, in the beginning of the attack, dif-,N 3 charged
charged it without effe&, when, as he reached his arm to deliver it, a cowardly assassin flabbed him in the breast, and he fell back senseless: The shrieks of his daughter on that event he supposed reached my ears, and providentially brought me to their affiflance." This little account of himself was accompa- nied by the warmest sentiments of gratitude, in which the too lovely Eugeniajoined.,He recovered fast, and had more than once mentioned his desire of renewing his journey, from an apprehension of intruding upon me: But far gone in a fatal paflion that was to mark my future days with sorrow, I earnefily besought him to remain some time with me, and endeavoured, by every act of attention and complaisance, to gain the esteem of the father, and the heart of his daughter. My sentiments could not long be unnoticed by either. The Count viewed me with kindness and complacency; but Eugenia grew more reserved, and though always grateful and polite, there was a respectful coldness in her,manners,
manners, repulsive to the warmth with which I always involuntarily addressed her.,Unaccustomed to meet with any oppofi- tion to my will, I was not prepared to ex- pect a denial to my wishes, when i should think it a proper time to disclose them, and being one day alone with the Count, I seized a favourable opportunity, and without reserve opened my heart to him, solicited the hand of his daughter, and made the most liberal offers my circumstances would admit of - The Count's charaaer was propitious to my views; he was naturally proud and avaricious, the want of a male heir had disappointed the first passion, and increased the second. A nephew was to enjoy his estates by the mar- riage settlements after his death, and what he could save from his income was all he could dispose of in favour of his daughter. He had been desirous of uniting her with his nephew, but that Gentleman travelling into England, had there married a young Lady of rank and fortune, an account of which had reached Count Zimchaw a very few weeks,N 4 previous
previous to my meeting with them in the wood. Disappointed in his wishes, he felt a good deal of anxiety for the fetdement of his child ; when therefore I declared my love, and made my propfials, he could not dif- guise his fatisfacion: - "To beflow my daughter on the preserver of my life and her hciouir (cried he) is the highest gratification I could picture to myself, and confers on me additional obligations. Yes, my dear Baron, Eugenia is your's, I pledge you my word, and answer for my child, that ihe will with joy ratify the gift I make you of her hand, and reward our deliverer from death and dif- honour.","c Mitiaken man ! he knew not the heart of his degenerate daugh~ter. Transported with the pro. ec&a of my expected happiness, yet ·rw.cnded by the recollection of her coldness, I entreated the Count to be my fl-iend, and aleak his approbation of my wishes, before I ventur.ed to diiflofe theri to her."," e will iofc no time," answered he, CC and it is sufficient for me to declare my,pleasure,
pleasure, and for her to obey. After we retire from dinner, your desires flall be confirmed. I left him under perturbations difficult to describe; joy, hope and fear, assailed me at once. I had nodoubt of her compliance with the commands of her father, but I feared her heart would have no lhare in her obedience."," After dinner we retired to the saloon, my mind was so extremely agitated, that my emotions attracted the observation of Eu- genia, nor did the uncommonipirits of the Count pass unnoticed: She viewed us alter- nately with a mixture of concern, and curi- ofity depicted in her countenance, which I -well understood, and when we entered the 'saloon, as I led her to a feat, I felt her hand tremble in mine. The Count scarcely per- mitted us to be feated, and the servant to slut the door, before rising briskly, and taking his daughter's hand, " My dear Eugenia, (said he, abruptly) our worthy friend and preserver Baron S-- * , has done us the honour to solicit an alliance with us; yes, my child, he offers his hand to your acceptance.,I
I have with joy accorded te his wishes, and here, my Lord, I ratify the gift," putting her hand into mine, as I bowed profoundly before her. She flarted up, trembled, and itrove to disengage her hand as I pressed it to my lips: ( My Father! my Lord !" cried she, extremely agitated, " spare me, 0, spare me, I cannot, indeed I cannot" --," Cannot what ?" exclaimed the Count, with a wrathful countenance: "Dare you resist n;y will ? Can you refuse the hand of your benefactor, the hand that saved your father's life ? Ungrateful girl ! cold and insen- fible to the honour you ought to receive with transports! Teach your tongue a different language, learn to be grateful, and obey my commands." He had scarcely pronounced those iaft words, when she fell lifeless before us.,The Count was excessively enraged: I was wounded to my very foul, yet called for that assistance he would have denied to her. She was carried to her apartment. " Pardon a foolish wayward girl (said he ) perhaps,4 the
the idea of marrying out of her own country has occasioned this apparent reluctance; a foolish local prejudice has got hold of her, which argument and reason will subdue. Be not disconcerted, my dear Baron (added he, embracing me) I swear to you that Eugenia shall be your wife." He left me at those words, and I remained overwhelmed with a thoufind turbulent passions, disappointed love, wounded pride, jealousy and despair, by turns agitated me almoit to madness. Her cold- ness, her repugnance, augmented my love and inflamed my.pride; passion and resent- mcn: were raised to their utmost pitch; I accused her of ingratitude and insensibility, and in the workings of my rage, swore she fiould be mine, whatever might be the con- sequences !,"I walked into the gardens to calm, if possible, die agitations of my spirits, but after firolling about two hours returned as reflefs as before. I met a servant, who said the Lady Eugenia wilhed to fee me in her apartment. I flew thither with undefcribable,emotions.
emotions. She was fitting on a sofa, looking pale as death, but more beautiful, more in- terefing than ever. Trembling I advanced, and would have flung myi'lf at her feet. - Hold, my Lord (said file, in a faint but serious voice) this iumiliation neither becomes you nor me; have the goodness to be feated, and hear me vith companion, and without displeasure." I took my feat. " My Lord, (contilnud lhe, in a firmer voice) think me not ungrateful, or inlenfibie toyour merits, or my great obligations to your generosity and humanity; I feel, I acknowledge all: You have claims I never can reward, and to give you my hand, circumstanced as I am, would be a base return for favours so unbounded. - My Lord, I have no heart to give ! that has long been in the poffefion of another; my father knows it well, but as his content could not be obtained to an union he thought unworthy of his approbation, I have sworn never to marry without it-I never will; but neither can I, will I, ever give my hand to another deign then, my Lord, to withdraw,your
your generous intentions in my favour, save me from the displeasure of my father, and let me be fill further indebted to your no- blenefs of mind ; the favour I solicit is no common one; but you have a foul superior to iclf-confideration, and on that I reft my confidence.",She might have proceeded for some time, without interruption from me, so aftonilhed and mortified did I feel at her address ; but when fie had ceased speaking, I endeavoured to recover my spirits, and told her, "that had there remained a posibility of her being united to the obje& of her attachment, I would have imposed silence upon my wishes for ever ; but as it was evident such a con- nexion never could take place, as I flattered myself that my tenderness, and earnest en- deavours to gain her heart, and promote her happiness, would in time have the desired effe&t; she muff forgive me if I coul not comply with her request, or forego a bleling her father had so kindly promised me.",5 ^· ]BksiTEng!"
" Bleffng !" cried she, indignantly; " can you call a reluaant hand, a heart devoted to another, and a lifeless form that will shrink with horror from an union imposed upon her by a stern parent, who to an unjult preju- dice would sacrifice his daughter; can you call such a sacrifice a blessing ? See, fee me at your feet (added she, endeavouring to prof- trate herself, which I prevented :) I beseech, I implore you, not to persist in your addreiffs; relptEt your own happiness, if you cannot feel for mine, misery must follow a compul- lion so repugnant to my foul.' ' At this moment her father entered the room: -She threw herself at his feet in an agony, " Father, my dear father! by that tender name I conjure you to hear me ! To your commands I have given up the dearest wishes of my heart; I have sworn never to marry the Count without your approbation; do not compel me to be miserable with another; never, never can I love the Baron as a husband: I esteem, I honour him as your preserver; I would lay down my life to,prove
prove my gratitude, but I have no heart to give,",The Count sternly bid her rife. ".I have heard you with patience (said he) and now do you hear me; and not only hear but obey me. You have dared to single out my greatest enemy as the object of your love, and even yet avow your affection for him to my face: I ought not therefore ;o be fur- prifed that this Nobleman, who has preserved my life and your honour, should be the objeEt of your aversion ! Your conduct sufficiently explains itself, and I know how to set a juit value on your love and duty so much boasted of: Now I put it to the proof; this infant I command you to give your hand to the Baron, or my everlasting curses shall follow you to the grave !",She started up, in a kind of wild horror: cc Hold! 0 hold! behold your devoted daughter, though diftraaion and death muff be the consequence, take, take my hand, ycu may beltow, I can never give it i" He snatched her offered hand, and put it into,mine;
mine; receive her, my Lord, as a pledge of gratittide from a father, who dares to boast the gift is worthy of your love; duty and obedience will make her all you can wish for. And you, Eugenia, remember what you owe for e;;e, and for yourself, happiness is in your ov-n powver." She answered notaword, her tears had ccafed to flow, I lifted her hand to my ips, flue v.ithdrew it not, but appeared fenfccifs and inanimate, looked alternately at her f.ther and myself, a wildness in her afpeEt, that stemed unconscious of the objects before her. I tried to recover her from this torpid fa.t by the tenderedt expressions: She heard me unmoved, and the Count having called her attendant, advised me to withdraw; I did io, and left them together.",O-. . EN- O I' 'O END OF -TH FIRST .'OLUM.E,